 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

AUCTIONS AS COMPETITION MECHANISMS AND THE BRAZILIAN 

ENERGY INDUSTRIES RECENT EXPERIENCE. 

 

Heloisa Borges Bastos Esteves 

Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ. 

hlborges@gmail.com 

 
Introduction 
 
The  legal  and  institutional  changes  through  which  most  infra-structure  industries  in  the 
Brazilian  economy  went  through  during  the  1990s  presented  some  similarities.  Some  of  the 
major changes were the enactment of new laws, the creation of independent regulatory bodies 
and the promotion of a competitive environment in the markets. 
Competition was implemented where it was possible by encouraging the entry of new players 
and  implementing  the  end  of  public  monopolies  in  key  segments  of  the  industries.  In  some 
sectors, moreover, competition was introduced through the adoption of bidding mechanisms. 
This paper analyses two particular choices: the bidding system for concession leases for oil 
& gas exploitation and the auctions for electricity commercialization. It intends to analyze the 
bids  adopted  in  the  commercialization  of  electricity  and  the  concession  of  oil  and  gas 
exploitation  fields.  From  the  viewpoint  of  the  set  of  rules  initially  applied,  there  will  be 
presented and compared the results obtained, as well as the modifications, improvements and 
changes of path implemented afterwards. 
 
I - Introduction 
 
One of the primordial objectives of the reforms implemented in Brazil from the mid-1990’s in 
the  infrastructure  sectors  was  the  introduction  of  competitive  pressures  in  industries 
traditionally characterized by an organization based on state-owned monopolies. According to 
Carneiro (2006), the convergence between the different models adopted in distinct segments 
was  that  the  deregulation  of  these  industries  was,  in  general,  based  on  the  construction  of 
market-oriented governance structures. 
 
Changes both in the legislative and regulatory dimensions were adopted so that general rules 
could  be  enacted;  they  allowed,  among  other  changes,  the  introduction  of  competition 
pressures in many segments of infrastructure industries1. In some of them (particularly in the 
energy industries), it was not possible to create competitive markets and the solution adopted 
(for the introduction of competitive pressures) was the construction of auction mechanisms. 
 
This  choice,  however,  did not obtain  the expected results. The  electricity  industry  in  Brasil 
went  through  a  supply  crisis  in  2001,  which  was,  in  part,  credited  to  the  design  of  the 
wholesale market that had been created in 1996. In the segment of hydrocarbons exploration 
and  production,  likewise,  the  results  and  agent  behavior  observed  were  different  from  the 
expected ones. 
 
The  next  section  will  present  a  short  synthesis  of  the  main  contributions  of  the  Auction 
Theory  to  the  problem  of  introducing  competition  in  segments  where  the  typical  market 
structure  does  not lead to  efficient  results. The  third  section  will  analyze  the  choices  made 
(the adopted models and the implemented rules) in light of the outline presented previously, 
pointing  to  similarities  and  differences  between  the  experiences.  Finally,  some  preliminary 
conclusions will be presented. 
 
                                                 
1  Glachant, J-M., 2002. 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

1

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

II – Auctions in the economic theory  
 
Auctions  have  become  popular  instruments  among  governments  and  policy  makers  in 
general;  from  offering  leases  or  public  concessions  to  operating  decentralized  markets, 
passing  through  privatization  of  state  owned  companies,  its  use  has  grown  in  the  last  two 
decades (and so has its empirical significance2).  
 
Brazil  used  auction  mechanisms  before  the  infrastructure  reforms  –  typically  when  the 
government  needed  to  buy  supplies  or  in  concession  leases  offers.  The  instrument  is  still 
extremely popular, and is mandatory for several public expenses (Law n. 8.666/93). With the 
increase  of  its  utilization,  with  new  types  of  auctions  being  designed  and/or  suggested  as 
means of serving the public interest, those new rules must be analyzed in order to grant that 
the expected results will be reached in the best possible way. 
 
The design of auction mechanisms, specially the introduction of pro-competitive rules in sale 
auctions  is  one  of  the  themes  that  became  popular  study  objects  in  the  last  decades,  and 
presently auctions rules and instruments arrangement and interaction allow the prediction of 
whether or not the expected results are likely to be achieved (as both the literature and the 
empirical experience are better developed). 
 
Two different situations will be analyzed, in this article: auctions for concessions leases for 
hydrocarbon  exploration  and  production  (a  rights  auction)  and  auctions  for  electricity 
commercialization (for the determination of the market long run price of electricity). 
 
Regarding  the  first  situation,  Leal  (1998)  emphasizes  that  the  main  objective  of  a  bidding 
process or sale of public goods, is the fact that the seller (the government) does not know the 
precise value of the good put for the sale (though in general a minimum price is stipulated) 
and  the  asymmetry  of  information  characteristics  of  the  transaction  allow  it  as  a  way  of 
extracting  private  information  from  the  agents  –  at  least  in  part.  One  of  the  commonest 
objectives  of  this  type  of  mechanism  is  the  maximization  of  the  sale  result  for  the  society 
(represented, in the process, by the public agent promoting the auction). 
 
Alternatively, the use of auctions as mechanisms of price determination is used, according to 
Carneiro (2006), because some goods do have not a value standard (for instance, because the 
price in question  depends on  the conditions  of  supply  and  demand  at a  specific  moment  in 
time, and is re-calculated in each transaction), as occurs to the electricity. 
 
The identification of the institutional rules of each auction is important, as the rules influence 
the  agents’  strategies  and  bids,  and  also  determine  the  allocation  efficiency  of  the  goods 
object of the auction. 
 
The  economic  literature  identifies  auctions  as  competitive  or  non-competitive  auctions;  the 
first ones are our focus in this paper. There are five basic types of auctions for sales: English 
(or price ascendant auction), Dutch (or price descendant auction), discriminatory auction (first 
price auction), second price auction and double auction.3.  
 
Furthermore,  competitive  auctions can  be  classified, according  to its  configuration,  in  open 
and closed bids auctions, uniform price auctions and multiple price auctions; and private and 
common value auctions4.  
                                                 
2 It should be pointed out, however, that there are far mor literature on sales auctions than there are on aquisition 
auctions..  
3 Due  to  this  paper  length  limit,  we  will  not  attain  on  each  specific  kind  and  its  particularities.  For  further 
descriptions of each auction see, for instance, Carneiro (2006) e Duraes (1997). 
4 The first distinction refers to the way bids are presented: in open auctions, the bids are proposed publicly, and in 
closed bids, they are presented in sealed envelopes, that are opened at the same time. The second distinction refers 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

2

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

 
As there are many possibilities, the choice of the auction design is a crucial decision for the 
policy maker. One of the aspects that interest the most public bureaucrats when determining 
sales auction rules is the results on the literature concerning the potential revenue of each type 
of auction and its results in terms of resource allocation (this is, for instance, the situation on 
the  hydrocarbons  exploration  and  production  leases 5 ).  On  electricity  commercialization 
auctions, on the other hand, the results must balance distinct objectives: the price determined 
should  attend  both  the  tariff  moderateness  goal  and  investment  incentives  (for  supply 
security).  In  both  situations,  the  convenience  of  each  auction  modality  depends  on  several 
hypothesis  on  the  market  characteristics,  on  the  goods  characteristics,  on  the  bidders  risk 
aversion behavior, on the number of bidders and on the information available. 
 
Also,  the  policy  choice  that  determines  the  kind  of  auction  in  each  industry  must  be 
appropriate (compatible) to the objectives presented. It should, in addition, take into account 
the fact that the set of rules adopted determines the result6.  
 

III – Auctions in the Brazilian Energy Industries 
 
Though auctions are able to present results that are close to the ones expected in competition, 
the  use  of  inappropriate  types  (unsuitable  for  the  peculiarities  of  each  sector)  can  be 
disastrous. It is, then, necessary not only a compatibility evaluation of model chosen with the 
objectives claimed, but also a careful analysis of the industry characteristics where the auction 
is inserted. Practical questions, like budgetary restrictions, market concentration and demand 
and supply elasticity must be addressed. Particularly, market power is especially relevant for 
the Brazilian hydrocarbon industry. 
 
Given  that  the  regulatory  process  reflects,  in  a  large  extent,  a  learning  process  for  the 
regulatory  agency;  the  models  of  auction  chosen  must  be  object  of  improvements  in  time, 
always taking as a north the objectives of public interest defined, in the Brazilian case, by the 
law. 
 
Two distinct experiences will be analyzed in this section: auctions for oil and gas exploration 
and production leases (promoted by the National Oil, Gas and Biofuels Agency - ANP) and 
the electricity long run commercialization auctions promoted by the National Electric Energy 
Agency - ANEEL. 
 

                                                                                                                                            
to the price paid by the participants: if all winning bidders pay the same price, it is a uniform price auction; if not 
(each bidder pays its individual price), it’s a multiple price auction. Finally, auctions can be classified as private or 
common  value  auctions  according  to  the  bidders’  evaluation  of  the  good:  in  private  value  auctions  each  bidder 
evaluation is subjective and non dependent of other bidder evaluation, as in common value auctions each bidder 
value  the  goods  from  the  same  objective  value.  So,  in  private  value  auctions,  the  price  determination  is  an 
individual problem and each bidder has its own valuation (distinct from the other participants). Alternatively, on 
common  value  auctions,  we  have  goods  that  have  a  unique  value  for  all  bidders,  and  everyone’s  valuation  is 
connected (Carneiro, 2006). 
The auction mechanisms that will be studied in this paper are traditionally identified as common value auctions; i.e. 
the same object is auctioned to all bidders, and there is a standard value defined by the auctioneer (the regulatory 
agencies of each industry), although each bidder has private information that allows him to determine its bids and 
infer other players bids. 
5 Vickrey was one of the first authors to study auctions from this point of view. In his works, he analyzes open 
auctions  versus  sealed  auctions  comparing  each  one’s  results  in  terms  of  revenue.  He  also  presents  attempts  to 
characterize  “optimal  auctions”  and  “income  maximizing  auctions”,  but  uses  very  strong  hypothesis  (Duraes, 
1997). 
6 Carneiro (2006) presents an interesting synthesis of agent strategies in each type of auction. The author presents, 
also,  analyze  of  special  cases  in  each  model  (collusion,  entry,  winners’  curse,  risk  behavior  and  resource 
allocation). 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

3

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

III. 1 – Oil and Gas Leases Auctions 
 
ANP  adopted,  for  this  rights  allocation  auction,  a  competitive  first  price,  closed  envelope, 
multiunit,  simultaneous  auction.7 (i.e.  the  winner  is  the  highest  bid,  and  all  bids  must  be 
presented in sealed envelopes, which must contain bids for all the areas in which the agent has 
interest) 
 
The economic theory indicates that the type chosen by ANP is adequate to the hydrocarbon 
industry  characteristics.  Particularly,  the  type  chosen  fits  the  objectives  declared  for  the 
auctions (declared previously to each one on the pre-editals)8. 
 
First of all, hydrocarbon reserves are items with resale possibilities, but the market value is 
estimated with an unknown characteristic (the presence of oil and gas fields in each area) – a 
common value auction is, therefore, required.  
 
The adoption of a first price, sealed envelope auction, however, induces the bidder to offer a 
bid  lower  than  its  subjective  evaluation  of  the  good  (it  can  be  proved  that,  if  there  are  no 
incentives  for  a  different  behavior,  bidders  will  offer  a  price  just  high  enough  to  beat  the 
second  best  offer).  The  auction  rules  should  be,  then,  designed  in  order  to  induce  the 
maximum approximation between the bidders’ offers and their real evaluation9. 
 
Finally,  the  adoption  of  royalty  payments  as  informational  variable10 not  only  stimulates 
competition (the winning bid must present strong proposals both in its ex-ante but also in its 
ex-post offer), but transfers part of the bidders’ risk for the auctioneer (in this case, for the 
Brazilian  government),  as  he  will,  too,  depend  on  a  posterior  result  to  collect  part  of  its 
revenue. 
 
An  auction  pre-notices  usually  present  similarities  regarding  the  auction  operacionalization. 
The show, also, the rules evolution and adequacy to the objectives proposed. And, given the 
existent relation between type of the auction and the strategic and/or cooperative behavior by 
the  agents,  to  monitor  and  to  restrict  such  behaviors  is  imposed  to  the  regulatory  agency. 
Otherwise, the agents will internalize this omission on its strategies, the results will be worst 
and serious agents might loose interest in participating on futures auctions. 
 
 
                                                 
7 Clearly  auctions  of  oil  and  gas  leases  must  be  considered  multi-unity  auctions.  There  are,  however,  countless 
difficulties to the development of a general theory for the sale of more than an object simultaneously. The main 
one is new strategic relations possible because of the combinations of the sold goods. 
The economic theory shows that in a context of multi-unity auctions, the format adopted by the auctioneer alters 
significantly the results not only regarding strategic behaviors, but also regarding the bidders’ decision rules and 
the auctions expected result. The objects can be sold sequentially or simultaneously, and in the Brazilian case the 
former was chosen. 
8The broad goals in terms of energy policy are determined by the law. The directives that must be observed in the 
process, however, are fixed by the National Council of Energetic Policy (CNPE) in its Resolutions. 
As diretrizes que devem ser observadas pela ANP na implementação da política energética nacional são fixadas 
pelo  Conselho  Nacional  de  Política  Energética  (CNPE)  em  suas  Resoluções.  Os  objetivos  de  cada  rodada  são 
explicitados nas Audiências Públicas que as precedem. Por exemplo, os objetivos da 8ª Rodada de Licitação foram 
apresentados em Audiência Pública pelo Diretor Nelson Narciso, sendo eles: i) a atração de novos investimentos; 
ii) a  ampliação das oportunidades de trabalho/indústria nacional; iii) a promoção de desenvolvimento na área de 
E&P; iv) a  recomposição das reservas nacionais; e v) a redução da dependência externa. 
9  The rules should, then, induce the agents to offer signature bonus and minimum exploration programs that best 
represent their expectative, so that the winner is the one that has the highest expectative regarding one particular 
area (and his bid was sufficiently close to his disposition to pay). 
10 In the oil and gas leases auctions, the payment carried out by the bidder is not an exclusive function of the bid: it 
is  also  a  function  of  the  additional  information  acquired  on  subsequent  moments.  In  other  words:  before  the 
auction,  neither  ANP  nor  the  bidders  know  if  a  particular  area  will  produce  oil.  It  is  adopted,  then,  a  variable 
payment mechanism (the royalties) that transfers part of the informational income from the winning player to the 
government. 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

4

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

 
After consideration of the results obtained in those auctions since its implementation, in 2003 
was introduced a change in the rules, aiming to stimulate the entry of new agents through the 
reduction  of  behavioral  barriers  to  entry  (represented  by  the  strategies  of  the  incumbent 
enterprises in the sector) and disincentive some strategies perceived as opposite to the public 
interest  objectives.  The  change  was  based  in  the  understanding  that  better  and  more  pro-
competitive rules would not only favor smaller companies entry but they would also stimulate 
competition among the agents already present on the hydrocarbon industry. 
 
The new rule, adopted initially for mature basins, consisted in the limitation of 02 (two) bids 
(as operator) per company and per area11. On the next year, an adjust was necessary and the 
limit was extended to 04 (four) fields per sector and became part of the rules for the following 
auctions. 
 
From  the  observation  of  the  results  achieved  (after  change  of  the  rules)  and  the  agent’s 
behavior  in  the  other  basins  (for  which  there  was  no  limit),  ANP  decided  to  enlarge  the 
restraint,  that  would  be  applied  for  almost  the  totality  of  the  areas  offered,  unifying  the 
bidding rules. 
 
The rules unification generated praises from medium and small companies, but was subject of 
strong  complaints,  mainly  from  Petrobras  and  a  few  other  companies,  that  were  adopting 
strategies that, although not illegal, were incompatible with the objective proposed. Although 
the Ministry tried to intervene in the process, in the name of the predominance of the public 
interest over the private one, the new rules were maintained. 
 
The  attempt  of  interference  of  the  Ministry  of  Mines  and  Energy  (MME)  in  the  process, 
however, stressed out the necessity of a strong autonomy for the regulatory Agency (as it is 
easy  for  politicians  to  confuse  public  and  private  objectives,  and  to  confuse  the  countries 
welfare with the public company results in terms of profits) 
 
The  “8th  Brazil  Round”  was  early  interrupted  by  a  judicial  decision.  ANP  found  itself, 
therefore,  obliged  to  discuss  in  judgment  the  legitimacy  of  the  rules  changes  (and  the 
Agency’s  competence  to  do  so).  That  represents  not  only  an  improper  interference  of  the 
Judiciary in the regulatory Agency’s decisions, but weakens the credibility of the process, as 
the return of the rules to its original status-quo may be interpreted as undue interference in the 
regulatory process. 
 
III. 2 – Electicity Comercialization Auctions  
 
The reforms of the electricity industry in many countries passed by the adoption of some kind 
of auction mechanism in the energy commercialization segment, as a way of reproducing the 
market  governance  system  of  resources  allocation12.  Despite  present  since  the  beginning  of 
the reforms, the auctions applied differs among them not only in time and in country, having 
its use been modified with the observation of the initial results of other experiences, as well as 
with the modification of the objectives of the governments and regulatory agencies. 
 
Following  the  example  of  others  countries,  Brazil  initially  designed  its  electricity  industry 
starting from the premise of that electricity was a commodity (Carneiro, 2006), and therefore 
could be commercialized in wholesale, short-term, markets (the interaction among supply and 

                                                 
11 Item 4.8 of the pre-notice of the “5th Brazil Round”. 
12 The Brazilian Electricity Industry uses other types of auctions (for instance, the auctions for transmission lines 
leases). Energy commercialization auctions, however, were chosen because this case present a very good example 
fo the evolution of norms and the role of public institutions in rupture periods. 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

5

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

demand  would  give  the  efficient  price  would  provide  market  incentives  for  long  run 
investment in electricity generation). 
 
MAE was designed as a multi-unit auction model with uniform price and sealed bids (since 
the  bidders  do not share  information  among  themselves)  in  which  the  prices  and  quantities 
were to be determined by the agents bids.13 MAE’s flaw’s in terms of investment allocation 
were  noticed,  but  there  was  a  lot  of  resistence  to  the  changes  suggested  at  that  time.  The 
failure  of  MAE’s  experience,  which  led  to  the  so-called  “Crise  do  Apagão”,  caused  the 
revision not only of the model of action adopted, but also the basis premises that were behind 
this choice.14 
 
When  of  the  crisis  period  in  Brazil,  the  international  experience  have  long  identified  some 
fails in the mechanism – such as price manipulation by some agents and the trend to market 
concentration  –  and  adopted  measures  to  correct  them  (by  reformulating  the  short-term 
auctions formats or using other types of auctions)15. In particular after it was verified that the 
bilateral  energy  concentration  and  that  the  mechanisms  of  short-term  contraction  were  not 
being suitable to guarantee long term supply and prevent other energy crisis, other types of 
auctions  were  used  to  commercialize  energy  in  the  long-run  (specifically  auctions  for  the 
distributors to buy energy). 
 
Given  the  main  goals  of  having  low  tariffs  and  making  sure  of  the  energy  supply  (which 
require rules that foster private investments), a great change was implemented. This change 
encompassed  not  only  the auction  systematic, but  also  the institutional  frame  of  the  energy 
sector.16 
 
Regarding  energy  commercialization,  two  trade  enviroments  were  created  by  the  Law  nº 
10.848/2003:  the  Free  Contractiong  Environment  (ACL)  and  the  Regulated  Contracting 
Environment  (ACR).  The  distinction  between  them  is  both  in  the  commercialization 
mechanism  and  in  the  consumers  allowed  to  enter  each  one  (sellers  may  operate  in  both 
environments). 
 
The ACL constitutes a free bilateral market (very similar to the MAE), but only industries and 
other large consumers may operate in it. The environment were electricity distributors must 
contract  100%  of  its  demand  prevision  is  the  ACR17;  in  it,  electricity  trades  is  operated 
through medium and long run electricity contract auctions18,19.  
                                                 
13 Offer  curves  were  created  through  the  bids  made  by  energy  generators.  Confronted  with  the  demand  curves 
resulted from the demand bids, the offer curves represented the energy prices in each time. 
14 Roxo (2005) claims that the intensity of the energy supply crisis that took place in Brazil imposed a step back to 
an  environment  of  strong  coordination  of  companies  and  institutions  of  this  sector.  The  measures  employed 
overcame the crisis, but were not enough to ensure safety to the energy supply. As a result, a complete process of 
revision of the legal framework  established in the 90s was triggered. In 2003, a new institutional model for the 
energy sector was implemented. 
15 According to Carneiro (2006), the rules implemented in the second half of the 1990’s determined that energy 
commercialization  and  pricing  policy  should  come  from  bilateral  negotiation  among  between  the  agents.  These 
structure, however, did not reach the intended goals. 
16 The ANEEL remained as regulating agent and conceding power, being also directly responsible for the recently 
created CCEE (Energy  Trade Chamber) and for the coordination of the energy auctions. The MME plays a key 
role in planning and coordinating the industry, assessing and approving the measures, rules and documents. It was 
also created the so-called Energy Research Company (EPE), in reply to the facts that caused the 2001 crisis (the 
general idea was that EPE would better plan and monitor the industry). 
17 Distribution companies must inform their demand prevision and the electricity amounts necessary to attend them 
to the MME. Based on this information, ANEEL provides auctions among generators for supplying distributors 
during that period of time, at a given price. 
18 There  are  also  small  adjustment  short-term  auctions  (for  the  distributors),  where  5%  of  the  total  demando 
predicted can be bought or sold (the idea is to reduce to a minimun these agents necessity for electricity in real 
time) – as they commercialize larger contracts, their operations could disturb the short-term market and open space 
for strategic behaviors. 
19 For further information on long run energy auctions and the transition period, see Decree nº 5.163/2004. 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

6

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

 
The  auction  mechanism,  then,  is  no  longer  responsible  for  investment  incentives  and 
allocation:  base  on  EPE’s  studies  the  MME  has  been  planning  the  industry  expansion 
centrally  and indicating  the  expansion  requirements. Auctions are responsible, now,  mainly 
for price determination. 
 
Carneiro  (2006)  points  out,  however,  that  clear  rules  were  not  presented  by  the  law  (only 
general characteristics and mechanisms). In this scenario, the institutions actions and choices 
is fundamental, as it determines the auctions rules, and they (the rules) are different in each 
auction (so are the agents strategies).  
 
In the new electricity sector institutional framework, then, the instrument that makes feasible 
an  adequate  supply  allied  to  tariff  moderateness  is  still  an  auction.  After  the  bad  results 
perceived  with  the  adoption  of  a  pure, short term  auction,  however, the need to  implement 
long  term  contracts  in  energy  commercialization  was  perceived.  Additionally,  given  the 
particular characteristics of the industry, different types of auctions – and not only one single 
model/market – were implemented. 
 
 
IV – Conclusion 
 
The reforms which energy industries in Brazil went trough aimed at the potential results of 
competitive mechanisms.  In some segments, in particular, the introduction of the competition 
was verified through alternative structures of governance, which sought to reach the results 
expected of the competition in terms of resource allocation efficiency and social welfare. 
 
Mechanisms of auction were adopted not only as part of a exogenous competition policy, but 
as  fundamental  instruments  in  the  sectorial  policies  implemented.  As  each  industry  had  its 
particular  characteristics  and  objectives,  the  designs  adopted  in  each  one  were  distinct. 
Institutional behavior (from the regulatory Agencies) and political interference (mainly form 
the MME), however, were not. 
 
In the hydrocarbons industry, exploratory concession leases auctions are utilized successfully 
to  the  around  of  the  world  (the  model  adopted  is  rarely  questioned,  and  the  suggestions  of 
improvements  in  general  concentrate  in  adjustments  to  eache  specific  situation).  In  the 
electricity industry, on the other hand, many auction mechanisms utilization experiences lead 
to failures (in fact, even experiences often presente as ‘success cases’ have its critics). 
 
In  particular,  Brazil  faced  problems  with  the  mechanisms  chosen  in  the  electricity  industry 
first reform.  The model established in the decade of 1990, based in a wholesale short term 
market,  entered  in  collapse,  failing  completely  in  attending  its  main  objectives.  The  flaws 
noticed before the crisis were not corrected (partially due to evaluation mistakes and partially 
due  to  a  resistance  –  from  the  market  –  to  changes).  As  a  result,  in  2003  the  market 
institutions were reformulated and new institutional framework and contracting mechanisms 
were created. 
 
In  the  hydrocarbon  such  rupture  is  not  observed:  concession  leases  auctions  have  been 
promoted  since  1999,  and  the  rules  are  virtually  the  same.  The  results,  however,  are  not 
entirely  satisfactory  (some  of  the  mains  objectives  were  not  fulfilled,  and  non  desirable 
strategic behaviors were observed), which led to the gradual implementation of changes.  
 
The process of definition of new auction mechanisms was started by a major supply crisis that 
left  no  other  alternative.  The  need  for  changes  in  the  rules  was  clear,  was  expected  by  all 
agents, and the legitimacy of the ANEEL for establishing these rules was not questioned in a 
significant way.   

Esteves, H.B.B. 

7

 9th IAEE European Energy Conference "Energy Markets and Sustainability in a Larger Europe" 

 
In the hydrocarbon industry, on the other hand, the adjust attempt was strongly rejected by the 
dominant agent of the industry and, occasionally, bunged by the Judicial Power. Despite the 
objectives determined in the law or the concession leases auctions are not being attended in 
the best possible way, the necessary modifications were interrupted in his beginning. 
 
Finally, in both the cases the empirical experience is lower than a decade and few works on 
the subject were published. Auction mechanisms design in Brazil, however, involves several 
questions  and  the  particularities  of  each  sector  still  need  to  be  better  researched.  In  this 
process, the restrain of political interference and the validation of technical decisions is urgent. 
Also, the the objectives of public interest aimed should be clear, and sealed against eventual 
contaminations with private, profit driven interests of the public companies. 
 
Carneiro  (2006)  points  out  that  mechanisms  built  through  consensus  between  some  of  the 
agents  involved  are  risky.  In  infrastructure  sectors  the  auction  mechanism  adopted  should 
reflect  competitive  objectives,  that  can  only  be  reached  trhough  a  institutional  agent 
(independent regulatory agencies) capable of imposing rules that can be accept as attending 
all social groups  

 

References 

ALMEIDA,  E.  L.  F.  e  PINTO  JR.,  H.Q.  (2005).  “Reform  in  Brazilian  Electricity 
Industry: The Search for a New Model”. International Journal of Global Energy Issues, 
vol. 23, No.2/3, 2005, p. 169 - 187 . 

CARNEIRO, M. C. F. (2006) “Os Leilões de Longo Prazo do Novo Mercado Elétrico 
Brasileiro”.  Dissertação  de  Mestrado.  Instituto  de  Economia/Universidade  Federal  do 
Rio de Janeiro. 

DURÃES,  M.  S.  D..  “Teoria  dos  Leilões:  Abordagem  comparativa  com  ênfase  nos 
leilões de títulos do tesouro no Brasil e em outros países”. Monografia vencedora do 2º 
Prêmio  STN  de  Monografias  –  1997,  sob  o  tema:  “Tópicos  Especiais  de  Finanças 
Públicas”. Brasília. Outubro, 1997. 

GLACHANT, J-M. (2002). “The making of competitive electricity markets in Europe”. 
In  J.-M.  Glachant  &  D.  Finon  (eds),  Competition  in  European  Electricity  Markets:  A 
Cross Country Comparison, Edward Elgar, chapter 1.  

HARRIS,  M.  e  RAVIV,  A.  (1988)  “Allocation  Mechanisms  and  the  Design  of 
Auctions”. Econometrica, no 49, ps 1477-1499. 
INDUSTRY  CANADA  (1995).  “Competition  Policy  as  a  Dimension  of  Economic 
Policy: a Comparative Perspective”. Occasional Paper Nr 7, May. 

KIRKNER, D.J. e SPENCER JR, B.F. (1996), "Monotonic Loading of Brittle Materials: 
A  Stochastic  Damage  Model,"  7th  ASCE  Specialty  Conference  on  Probabilistic 
Mechanics  and  Structural  Reliability,  Worcester,  Massachusetts,  August  7—9,  1996. 
Proceedings, 354—357. 

LEAL,  C.  F.  C.  (1998)  “Ágios,  Envelopes  e  Surpresas:  Uma  Visão  Geral  da 
Privatização das Distribuidoras Estaduais de Energia Elétrica”.  Revista  do  BNDES, 05 
(10).  

ROXO,  L.  F.  (2005)  “Credibilidade  das  Reformas:  Uma  Análise  do  Setor  Elétrico 
Brasileiro”.  Dissertação  de  Mestrado.  Instituto  de  Economia/Universidade  Federal  do 
Rio de Janeiro. 

Esteves, H.B.B. 

8

