 

 

Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
Shale Gas Study 
Final Report 
 
 
 

April 2015 
Amec Foster Wheeler Environment  
& Infrastructure UK Limited 

2 

 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 
Copyright and non-disclosure notice 
The contents and layout of this report are subject to copyright 
owned by Amec Foster Wheeler (© Amec Foster Wheeler 
Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 2015). save to the 
extent that copyright has been legally assigned by us to 
another party or is used by Amec Foster Wheeler under 
licence.  To the extent that we own the copyright in this report, 
it may not be copied or used without our prior written 
agreement for any purpose other than the purpose indicated in 
this report. The methodology (if any) contained in this report is 
provided to you in confidence and must not be disclosed or 
copied to third parties without the prior written agreement of 
Amec Foster Wheeler.  Disclosure of that information may 
constitute an actionable breach of confidence or may 
otherwise prejudice our commercial interests.  Any third party 
who obtains access to this report by any means will, in any 
event, be subject to the Third Party Disclaimer set out below. 

Third-party disclaimer  
Any disclosure of this report to a third party is subject to this 
disclaimer.  The report was prepared by Amec Foster Wheeler 
at the instruction of, and for use by, our client named on the 
front of the report.  It does not in any way constitute advice to 
any third party who is able to access it by any means.  Amec 
Foster Wheeler excludes to the fullest extent lawfully permitted 
all liability whatsoever for any loss or damage howsoever 
arising from reliance on the contents of this report.  We do not 
however exclude our liability (if any) for personal injury or 
death resulting from our negligence, for fraud or any other 
matter in relation to which we cannot legally exclude liability.   

Management systems 
This document has been produced by Amec Foster Wheeler 
Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited in full compliance with 
the management systems, which have been certified to ISO 
9001, ISO 14001 and OHSAS 18001 by LRQA. 

Document revisions   

No. 

Details 

Draft Report 

Revised Report 

Final 

1 

2 

3 

 
 

Date 

21.11.2014 

16.03.2015 

29.04.2015 

Report for 
Tatiana Coutinho, Project Officer 
Setor de Embaixadas Sul 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
Bririah Embassy 
Quadra 801, Conjunto K 
Brasilia, DF 
Brazil 

Main contributors 
Pete Davis 
Alex Melling  
Daren Luscombe 
Katherine Mason 
Rob Deanwood 
Silvio Jablonski, ANP 

Issued by 
 
 
................................................................................. 
Alex Melling 

Approved by 
 
 
................................................................................. 
Pete Davis 

Amec Foster Wheeler 
Gables House 
Kenilworth Road 
Leamington Spa 
Warwickshire CV32 6JX 
United Kingdom 
Tel +44 (0) 1926 439 000 
 
Doc Ref. 35779rr 
 
h:\projects\35779 shale gas study\1 
client\reports\report\final\shale gas study _final.docx 
 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

3 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Executive summary 

Purpose 

The exploration and production of shale gas represents a significant opportunity for many countries.  It could 
help address energy security, energy costs and the need for transitional energy sources in moving towards a 
low carbon future.  Brazil, as one of 10 countries that have collectively been estimated to contain nearly 80% 
of the world’s estimated technically recoverable shale gas resources1, is actively considering the potential for 
shale gas.  However, in common with many other nations2 considering the potential for unconventional oil 
and gas, the proposed development of shale gas in Brazil has also raised concerns regarding the potential 
effects on the environment3. 

At present, Brazil does not have specific procedures or recommendations from the environmental agencies 
concerning shale gas or oil exploration and development although there is a resolution from ANP, the oil and 
gas licensing agency, for the management of risks to human health and the environment.  Following an 
initiative of the Ministries of Mines and Energy and the Environment, a project has been established to 
analyse the key issues concerning the development and production of unconventional oil and gas resources 
under a federal Program known as PROMINP (Mobilization Program of Industry in the Oil and Natural Gas).  
As a contribution to research under PROMINP and in order to support the Brazilian government develop a 
strong regulation for the safe exploration of shale gas by drawing on international research, Amec Foster 
Wheeler Environment and Infrastructure UK Ltd has completed a review of the risks to the environment and 
human health of shale gas exploration and production and the approaches to managing these risks through 
regulatory frameworks in the UK and Europe. 

Environmental Risks 

The key risks identified through this work are summarised in the following table.  It indicates that the majority 
of risks and impacts associated with unconventional oil and gas exploration and development are common to 
those associated with conventional oil and gas development.  Differences however do occur when 
considering the technologies and requirements of the hydraulic fracturing process itself.  These are likely to 
include: induced seismic events; the local sourcing of water, creating additional demand during periods of 
water stress; the management of chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture fluid, the 
management of flowback water and fugitive greenhouse gas emissions.   

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional 

Un-
conventional  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Theme 

Biodiversity 

 

Direct loss and/or fragmentation of habitat from construction and operation of 
well site and well pad activities. 

Indirect impacts on habitats/species due to, for example, disturbance from 
noise, human presence and light pollution and the introduction of invasive 
species and the exposure to pollution through causal pathways. 

Land Use and  
Geology 

Land requirements for pad and pipelines, disruption to soil layers and 
compaction and resulting impacts on removal of land for alternative uses 
(natural or anthropogenic) and ecology/ environment impacts.   

                                                            

1 US Energy Information Administration, Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale 
Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013 
2 BIO Intelligence Service (2013), Presentation of the results of the public consultation “Unconventional fossil fuels (e.g. shale gas) in 
Europe” Brussels – 7th June 2013, for the European Commission and DG Environment, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/Presentation_07062013.pdf     
3 Brazilian Academy of Sciences Letter to President Rouseff, 5th August 2013, http://jonathandealblog.com/2013/08/29/fracking-not-
welcomed-with-open-arms-in-brazil/ 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional 

Un-
conventional  

Induced seismicity from hydraulic fracturing activities and the potential 
impact on well integrity, creation of geological pathways for pollutants and 
possible minor earth tremors. 

 (in limited 
circumstance4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

4 

Theme 

 

Water Resources  Surface spillage of pollutants such as diesel and drilling fluids and silt-laden 

run-off resulting in surface water pollution.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Surface spillage of hydraulic fracturing fluids and wastewaters resulting in 
surface water pollution. 

Well failure resulting in pollutants released from the well to groundwaters.  

Introduction of pollutants due to induced fractures providing pathways to 
groundwater resources through either pre-existing man-made or natural 
structures. 

Inappropriate selection of chemicals in hydraulic fracturing and/ or unsuitable 
assessment leading to unacceptable risks to the environment from releases. 

Water consumption associated with hydraulic fracturing activities affecting 
the availability of water resources, aquatic habitats and ecosystems and 
water quality. 

Well pad development at risk of flooding and/or resulting in increased flood 
risk off site due to increase in impermeable area and/or location of facilities 
in areas of flood risk. 

Air Quality 

Emissions to air from well pad construction and drilling resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

 

Emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

Climate Change 

Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from well pad construction and drilling. 

 

 

 

 

GHG emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities. 

GHG emissions arising from well completion. 

Fugitive GHG emissions. 

Combustion of extracted hydrocarbons generating GHG emissions. 

Waste Arisings 

Generation of construction and drilling wastes.  

 

Generation of flowback water following hydraulic fracturing activities. 

Cultural Heritage  Direct loss of or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes from 

construction of well pad and associated infrastructure. 

 

Indirect effects on the setting of cultural heritage assets as a result of the 
well pad construction and operation. 

Landscape 

Impacts and landscape character and visual amenity due to well pad 
construction and operation activities. 

Human Health 

Emissions to air, dust and noise associated with construction and drilling 
activities resulting in adverse impacts on nearby receptors.   

                                                            

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 Davies et al (2012) Induced Seismicity and Hydraulic Fracturing for the Recovery of Hydrocarbons, Marine and Petroleum Geology 
Manuscript, https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/InducedSeismicityfull.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

5 

Theme 

 

 

 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Risk/Impact 
 

Contamination of drinking water supply due to hydraulic fracturing activities.   

Risks associated with the health and safety of workers onsite.   

Disturbance and nuisance issues  

Conventional 

Un-
conventional  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Measures to Avoid, Minimise and Mitigate Risks 

Given the commonality between the effects arising from unconventional oil and gas and conventional oil and 
gas exploration, there is a considerable body of practice available to address the issues concerning site 
selection, technology, construction practice, operation and decommissioning.  These measures to avoid, 
minimise and mitigate risks are contained in Section 3 of this report which itself summarises details 
contained in Appendix B.  Within the UK there is a long track record of undertaking conventional oil and gas 
exploration and production in an environmentally and socially acceptable manner, which suggests that such 
measures are effective in managing those effects that are common between unconventional and 
conventional oil and gas exploration and production5.   
The remaining mitigation measures identified for the effects associated with hydraulic fracturing (induced 
seismic events; the local sourcing of water, creating additional demand during periods of water stress; the 
management of chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture fluid, the management of flowback 
water and fugitive greenhouse gas emissions) are, within the UK context, unproven; however, reflect expert 
judgment on what is most effective: 

  Management of induced seismicity: recommendations from the Royal Society and Royal 

Academy of Engineering in their 2012 report, ‘Shale gas extraction in the UK: a review of 
hydraulic fracturing’6. 

  Management of chemicals used in fracture fluids: requirements of the Environment Agency7, 

and the assessment of effects against the requirements of the Joint Agencies Groundwater 
Directive Advisory Group. 

  Management of water demand and flowback water: recommendations from Water UK 

research8 and recommendations from CIWEM report on Shale Gas and Water9.  

  Management of fugitive greenhouse gas emissions: recommendations from Mackay and 
Stone report10 into potential greenhouse gas emissions associated with shale gas extraction 
and use.   

European Regulatory Framework 

The European regulatory framework to manage the risks to the environment and human health of shale gas 
exploration and production has been reviewed.  The European Commission adopted Recommendation 

                                                            

5 House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee (2011), Shale Gas Fifth Report of Session 2010–12, HC 795, May 2011 
6 Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering (2012), Shale gas extraction in the UK: a review of hydraulic fracturing (Terms of 
Reference, pp 8) June 2012 
7 Environment Agency (2013), Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance, Consultation Draft, August 2013 
8 Amec Foster Wheeler (2013), Understanding The Potential Impacts Of Shale Gas Fracking On The Uk Water Industry-Stage 1, Report 
Ref. No. WR09C301 
9 CIWEM (2014), Shale Gas and Water: An independent review of shale gas exploration and exploitation in the UK with a particular 
focus on the implications for the water environment 
10 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  London: DECC 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

6 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

2014/70/EU11 provides a set of coherent minimum principles that may be used for Member States that are 
looking to develop the exploration and production of hydrocarbons using high volume hydraulic fracturing 
(HVHF). The Recommendation provides a common framework for competent authorities, operators and the 
civil society to work within.  It reflects a considerable body of work, including an assessment of risks, Member 
State practice and the scope of existing legislation and potential policy options12.  It is however, not a 
Directive and so the extent to which it will be implemented across Member States remains uncertain, 
although its effectiveness will be reviewed 18 months after its publication. 
The Recommendation attempts to address the gaps identified within the existing suite of Directives and 
Regulations.  These include: 

  Insufficient requirement for site characterisation and setting of baseline conditions for air, water 

and soil; 

  Insufficient requirement for subsurface site characterisation, including baseline conditions for 

deep ground/geology/seismicity; 

  No criteria or common principles available against which to perform a geological risk 

assessment; 

  No monitoring of injection tests/‘mini-fractures’ required; 

  Requirement for cumulative effects may be inconsistently implemented (e.g. of environmental 

impacts, traffic related impacts and land take); 

  Public participation not always required as it generally occurs upon the performance of an EIA, 
which, at exploration stage, is not required if the screening procedure concludes that the project 
is not likely to have significant effect on the environment. 

  Post closure monitoring requirements insufficiently specified. 

At the European Member State level: 

  None of the Member States examined have a regulatory regime specifically for unconventional 

gas; 

  There are legal uncertainties which are prompting Member States to review legislation and draft 

new law leaving to potential divergence, although this may be addressed by the 
Recommendation. 

  Whilst the completion of guidance by Member States is still in its early stages, under the 

Recommendation, the Commission will be reviewing current reference documents to ensure 
that they covers the management of waste from hydrocarbon exploration and production 
involving High Volume Hydraulic Fracturing (HVHF).  Such information will be publicly available 
and so could help inform emerging guidance in Brazil.  

Brazilian Regulatory Framework 

In considering the environmental implications of shale gas exploration and production, both Brazil and the 
EU have recognised the importance of undertaking a high level assessment of areas to be licensed.  Within 
the EU, this is through the implementation of the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive 
(2001/42/EC), whilst in Brazil, it is under the Interministerial Ordinance 198/2012 (“environmental 
assessment of sedimentary area”).  Both require the licensing body to set out its proposed areas, identify the 
nature of any effects and identify where development will not be "suitable" due to likely significant adverse 
environmental effects.  There is potential for the Ordinance 198/2012 to go further in the consideration of the 

                                                            

11 Commission recommendation on 22nd January 2014 on minimum principles for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such 
as shales gas) using high-volume hydraulic fracturing (2014/70/EU), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32014H0070&from=EN   
12 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/uff_studies_en.htm  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

7 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

scope of the effects considered (to ensure that they anticipate those considered at the project stage) and to 
issue guidance to operators on matters to consider at the project stage.  At the project level, Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) is a common assessment tool across both Brazil and Europe, with appropriate 
matters identified through scoping.     
The ANP Resolution 21/2014 provides the first specific basis for a regulatory framework for managing 
operational safety issues, as well as possible effects on the environment and human health, related with 
unconventional gas in Brazil.  In this approach it is analogous to the role played by the European 
Commission adopted Recommendation 2014/70/EU which provided a set of minimum principles that may to 
be used when looking to develop the exploration and production of hydrocarbons using HVHF.   
Drawing on the contents of Recommendation 2014/70/EU and the research findings completed as part of 
this study, there is an opportunity to refine the ANP Resolution further to clarify certain aspects of the 
Resolution in order to improve its effectiveness.  These include: 

  Reviewing the definition of hydraulic fracturing. 
  Extending the information required to be provided from operators to include: the availability and 

capacity of existing water resources; the quantities, quality and management of waste water; 
and the monitoring of any induced seismicity. 

  Ensuring any separation distances between wells and aquifers is supported by the most recent 

research and international practice.   

  Requiring surface casing and cementation to extend to a specified depth below any aquifer 

used for domestic consumption/public water supply.  

  Providing a traffic light system approach to the control of hydraulic fracturing and any induced 

seismicity.   

  Requiring further detail from the operator regarding monitoring post well decommissioning and 

abandonment.    

The Resolution also states that the approval of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs by ANP will 
depend on, among other requirements, the "presentation by the operator of the environmental permit issued 
by the competent agency, with specific authorization for operations of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional 
reservoir, when applicable".  The Brazilian environmental legislation does not define what should be included 
within the environmental permit, and what supporting studies would be necessary.  A recent amendment to 
UK law (the Infrastructure Act 2015) introduced the requirement for a hydraulic fracturing consent, to be 
issued by Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) to the operator, where hydraulic fracturing is 
proposed at a depth below 1,000m (see Section 4.6.1) and in applying for this consent, the operator needs 
to demonstrate that it has met the following conditions:  

  The environmental impact of the development has been taken into account by the local planning 

authority. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the independent inspection of the integrity of the 

relevant well. 

  The level of methane in groundwater has, or will have, been monitored in the period of 12 

months before the associated hydraulic fracturing begins. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the monitoring of emissions of methane into the 

air. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within protected groundwater source 

areas. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within other protected areas. 
  Cumulative effects have been taken into account. 
  Regulator approval has been given to the substances to be used. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

8 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Appropriate arrangements are made for restoration of the site, once exploration and/or 

production activity has concluded. 

  Relevant consultations have been completed.  

In the absence of a current definition of what to include within an environmental permit for hydraulic 
fracturing within Brazil, the current UK hydraulic fracturing consent information provides a useful starting 
point and it is recommended that the PROMINP project considers the application of these requirements (or 
similar) in more detail. 

The PROMINP project provides a basis to address a number of additional issues, to facilitate the safe and 
effective regulation of unconventional gas.  As, part of this project, and aligned with developments in Europe 
we would encourage the consideration of the following issues. 

  Capacity Building;  
  Zoning and Minimum Distances; 

  Baseline conditions; 
  Monitoring; 
  Disclosure of Information; 

  Hydraulic Fracturing 
  Induced Seismicity; 
  Carbon Emissions; 

  Well Closure. 

It is recommended that an evaluation is undertaken of the proposed mitigation and management measures 
for each of the above areas to test and aid their refinement and to ensure their applicability to Brazil.  This 
could be undertaken by members of the PROMINP project team as part of the current PROMINP project. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

9 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Contents 

 
1. 
Shale Gas 
1.1  Overview 
1.2 
1.3 

Methodology 
Limitations 

Purpose of this Report 
Scope of the Study 
1.3.1 
1.3.2 
Shale Gas Resources and Reserves 
1.4.1 
Definitions 
1.4.2 
Global Context 
1.4.3 
The Shale Gas Opportunity in Brazil 
1.4.4 
Concerns of Brazilian Society 
1.4.5 
Need for Regulation 
Report Contents 

Shale Gas Extraction 

Shale Exploration and Production 
Introduction 
Shale and Shale Gas 
2.2.1 
Stages of Shale Gas Extraction 
2.3.1 
2.3.2 
2.3.3 
2.3.4 
2.3.5 
2.3.6 
Summary 

Stage 1: Non-Intrusive Exploration 
Stage 2: Exploration Drilling and Hydraulic Fracturing 
Stage 3: Production Development 
Stage 4: Production, Operation and Maintenance 
Stage 5: Decommissioning of Wells 
Stage 6: Site Restoration and Relinquishment 

What are the Risks and the Effects? 

1.4 

1.5 

2. 
2.1 
2.2 

2.3 

2.4 

3.3 

3.5 

3.6 

3. 
3.1  Overview 
3.2 

Effects on Biodiversity and Nature Conservation 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Biodiversity and Nature Conservation 
3.2.1 
3.2.2 
Land Use and Geology 
3.3.1 
Effects on Land Use and Geology 
3.3.2 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.4  Water Resources 

Effects on Water Resources 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.4.1 
3.4.2 
Air quality 
3.5.1 
3.5.2 
Climate Change 
3.6.1 
3.6.2 

Effects on Air Quality 
Key Risk and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Effects on Climate Change 
Key Risk and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.7  Waste Arisings 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

13 
13 
14 
14 
15 
16 
17 
17 
17 
20 
22 
23 
23 

25 
25 
25 
25 
26 
27 
27 
32 
33 
33 
34 
34 

35 
35 
37 
37 
39 
42 
42 
44 
47 
47 
51 
58 
58 
59 
61 
61 
63 
65 

66 
66 
69 
69 
70 
71 
71 
71 
72 
72 
73 
77 
80 

83 
83 
83 
87 
87 
88 
90 
93 
93 
93 
94 
94 
94 
95 
95 
97 
98 
98 
99 
99 
100 

103 
103 

103 
103 
106 
108 
108 

4.7  Moratoria 
France 
Bulgaria 

4.7.1 
4.7.2 
Voluntary Measures 
Summary 

4.8 
4.9 

5. 

5.1 
5.2 

 

10 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Effects on Waste Arising 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Effects on Cultural Heritage 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.8 

3.9 

3.7.1 
3.7.2 
Cultural Heritage 
3.8.1 
3.8.2 
Landscape 
3.9.1 
3.9.2 

Effects on Landscape 
Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.10  Human Health 

3.10.1  Effects on Human Health 
3.10.2  Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

3.11  Collective Measures for Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation 
3.12  Summary 

4. 

4.1 
4.2 
4.3 

4.4 
4.5 

4.6 

Relevant European Community Directives and Regulations 

European Regulatory Framework for the Environmental Effects of 
Shale Gas 
Introduction 
European Community Recommendation 
Recommendation Commitments and Review 
4.3.1 
Strategic Environmental Assessment 
Environmental Impact Assessment 
4.5.1 
4.5.2 
4.5.3  Water Framework Directive 
4.5.4 
4.5.5 
4.5.6 
4.5.7 
European Member State Regulations 
4.6.1 

SEVESO II/SEVESO III 
REACH 
ELD 
GD and GWD 

Habitats Directives 
Mining Waste Directive 

Advances in the UK 

Brazilian Regulatory Framework for the Environmental Effects of Oil 
and Gas 
Introduction 
Environmental Regulatory Requirements for the Oil and Natural Gas 
industry 
5.2.1 

Environmental Permitting and EIA 

5.3  Other Activities 
5.4 
5.5 

Strategic Environmental Assessment 
Unconventional Resources and Resolution ANP 21/2014 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

11 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

5.6 

Conclusion 

111 

Potential Implication for Brazilian Regulatory Framework for Shale Gas113 
6.1.1 
6.1.2 
6.1.3 
6.1.4 
6.1.5 
6.1.6 
6.1.7 
6.1.8 
6.1.9  Well Closure 

Capacity Building 
Zoning and Minimum Distances 
Baseline conditions 
Monitoring 
Disclosure of Information 
Hydraulic Fracturing 
Induced Seismicity 
Carbon Emissions 

119 
119 
119 
120 
121 
121 
122 
122 
123 

Glossary and Abbreviations 

125 

Table 1.1:  
Table 2.1: 
Table 3.1 
Table 3.2 
Table 3.3 
Table 3.4 
Table 3.5 
Table 3.6 
Table 3.7 
Table 3.8 
Table 3.9 
Table 3.10 
Table 3.11 
Table 3.12 
Table 3.13 
Table 3.14 
Table 4.1 
Table 4.2 
Table 4.3 
Table 4.4 

Figure 1.1:  
Figure 1.2  
Figure 2.1: 
 

Top 10 Countries with Technically Recoverable Shale Gas Resources (TRR) 
Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities 
Potential Causes of Principal Environmental Risks Specific to Unconventional Gas Exploration  and 
Production 
Summary of Risks to Biodiversity and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Land Use and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks from Induced Seismicity and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Surface Water and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Ground Water and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Water Resource Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Air Quality and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Climate Change Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Waste Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Cultural Heritage and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Landscape and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of Risks to Human Health and Mitigation Measures 
Summary of High Level Risks and Mitigation Measures 
Regulatory and non-regulatory measures included in the Recommendation 
Summary of Relevant Directives and Regulations 
SEA Topics 
EIA and screening status in selected Member States 

Global Shale Resource Estimates  
Onshore Sedimentary Basins with Prospectivity in Brazil 
Shale Gas Exploration and Production 

18 
34 
35 
39 
44 
45 
52 
55 
58 
60 
64 
67 
70 
72 
74 
77 
85 
87 
89 
90 

18 
21 
26 

Appendix A 
Appendix B 
Appendix C 

Terms of Reference 
Environmental Topic Chapters 
EU “Acquis Communautaire” Relating to Shale Gas 

6. 

7. 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

12 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

13 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

1.  Shale Gas 

1.1  Overview 

The exploration and production of shale gas represents a significant opportunity for many countries.  It could 
help address energy security, reduce energy costs and meet the need for transitional energy sources in 
moving towards a low carbon future.13  The United States (US) stands as an example of the huge economic 
impact that shale gas and oil can have and the transformational economic effects in the US have been 
influential in the energy policy thinking of many countries.14,15     

Brazil has been ranked by the US Energy Information Administration as one of the top 10 countries that have 
collectively been estimated to contain nearly 80% of the world’s estimated technically recoverable shale gas 
resource16 is actively considering the potential for shale gas.  The scale of the resource is potentially 
significant: its shale deposits could exceed its pre-salt gas reserves17 .  In consequence, shale gas could 
provide an alternative indigenous energy resource to supplement the current sources (which are reliant on 
hydro-electricity) and could help seek to cut dependency on liquefied natural gas (LNG) imports.  
“Discovering shale gas and other unconventionals would be ideal” for Brazil, Mauricio Tolmasquim, head of 
the government’s energy policy agency (EPE) has been quoted as saying.18   
Whilst hydraulic fracturing has been a drilling techniques used for many years as part of enhanced oil and 
gas recovery and for geothermal exploitation, its application to shale gas and oil has increased the potential 
volumes of water and chemicals used.  In common with many other nations19 considering the potential for 
unconventional oil and gas, the proposed development of shale gas in Brazil has also raised concerns 
regarding the potential effects on the environment20.  These concerns centre on a number of factors:  

  The risk of water contamination from hydraulic fracturing fluids, gas migration and surface 

wastewater; 

  The risks to water resources from the use of water required for hydraulic fracturing, particularly 

in water scarce locations;  

  Intensive development (in the manner of the extensive networks of well pads in the western US) 

could fragment sensitive ecologies;  

  Methane emissions from wells and pipelines specifically, and increased fossil fuel consumption 

generally threaten to accelerate climate change;  

  Induced seismic events arising from hydraulic fracturing could cause surface damage to 

property and people; and  

  The combination of local impacts from development in less disturbed environments.   

                                                            

13 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group 3, 5th Assessment Report, 2014 
14 House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee (2014), 3rd Report of Session 2013–14, The Economic Impact on UK Energy Policy of 
Shale Gas and Oil, 2014 
15 International Energy Agency (2013), World Energy Outlook 2013, page 115 
16 US Energy Information Administration (2013), Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 
Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013 
17Peak Oil (2013), Brazil Advances in the Shale Game, 23rd December 2013  http://peakoil.com/production/brazil-advances-in-the-shale-
game 
18Bloomberg Business, Brazil Prepares to Surprise Drillers This Time With Gas, 8th February 2013 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-08/brazil-prepares-to-surprise-drillers-this-time-with-gas.html 
19 BIO Intelligence Service (2013), Presentation of the results of the public consultation “Unconventional fossil fuels (e.g. shale gas) in 
Europe” Brussels – 7th June 2013, for the European Commission and DG Environment, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/Presentation_07062013.pdf     
20 Brazilian Academy of Sciences Letter to President Rouseff, 5th August 2013, http://jonathandealblog.com/2013/08/29/fracking-not-
welcomed-with-open-arms-in-brazil/ 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

14 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Concerns and opposition have been raised in a number of quarters.  For example, in 2013 the Brazilian 
Academy of Sciences appealed in a public letter to Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff to suspend the 12th 
onshore licensing auction “in light of the Brazilian government’s intention to pursue shale gas exploration”.  
In December 2013, prosecutors in Piauí state requested a court injunction to ban the practice of hydraulic 
fracturing and in June 2014, a court upheld a ban in Paraná state, affecting existing licence holders.   
At present, Brazil does not have specific regulations concerning shale gas or oil exploration and 
development although there is a resolution from ANP, the oil and gas licensing agency, for the management 
of risks to human health and the environment.  Following an initiative of the Ministries of Mines and Energy 
(MME) and the Environment (MfE), a project aiming at "analysing critical issues concerning the development 
and production of unconventional oil and gas resources and the definition of public policies for its 
environmentally safe exploitation" has been set up under a federal program known as PROMINP 
(Mobilization Program of Industry in the Oil and Natural Gas). The expected result is likely to be a “white 
paper” summarizing the critical issues and the actions needed for solution/mitigation of the impacts related to 
the use of unconventional hydrocarbons; the proposition of normative and regulatory acts to the promotion of 
the activity; and the adoption of measures for communication and clarification of the main stakeholders 
(public prosecutors, scientific community, non-governmental organisations (NGOs)) and of society at large.  
As a contribution to the PROMINP study, and in order to support the Brazilian government develop a strong 
regulation for the safe exploration of shale gas by drawing on international research, Amec Foster Wheeler 
Environment and Infrastructure UK Ltd (Amec Foster Wheeler) was appointed by the FCO under the 
2014/15 Prosperity Fund to provide a review of the risks to the environment and human health of shale gas 
exploration and production and the approaches to managing these risks through regulatory frameworks in 
the UK and Europe. 

1.2 

Purpose of this Report 

The purpose of this report is to: 

  Provide an outline of the likely significant effects and principal risks associated with hydraulic 

fracturing as a means to extract shale gas, including geological risks, such as induced 
seismicity, environmental risks, such as groundwater contamination, and climate change risks, 
such as from fugitive methane emissions 

  Provide a summary of the measures to avoid, minimise or mitigate the likely effects to ensure 

that the risks to the environment and human health can be effectively managed  

  Provide a review of the regulations that are used in the UK and Europe to address the specific 

risks to the environment and human health from hydraulic fracturing.  

  Outline what lessons can be learned from the regulatory frameworks employed in UK and 

Europe to the management of risks associated with hydraulic fracturing that could be relevant to 
the Brazilian context. 

1.3 

Scope of the Study 

The study focuses on the likely significant effects and associated risks to the environment and human health 
arising from onshore extraction of shale gas from hydraulic fracturing only.   
Offshore shale gas extraction and the subsequent use of shale gas will not be addressed.   

The effects and risks of other types of unconventional oil and gas, such as virgin coalbed methane, have not 
been considered in the study; although may become important for future considerations of resources in 
Brazil. 
The study does not consider the effects from conventional oil and gas extraction and production. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

15 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The focus on the effects and associated risks from onshore extraction of shale gas from hydraulic fracturing 
mirrors the focus of the Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering report on shale gas extraction in 
the UK, whose scope was an important influence on this study21.  

1.3.1 

Methodology 

To undertake this work, the following activities have been completed: 

i. 

ii. 

Terms of Reference were drafted and agreed with the FCO and ANP, to ensure that the subsequent 
project aims addressed the principal needs of the Brazilian government stakeholders and the 
PROMINP project. 

Publicly accessible information and peer reviewed research was used as the basis to identify and 
assess likely significant effects and principal risks to the environment and human health associated 
with hydraulic fracturing for shale gas.  This included: 
  Studies for the European Commission used as part of the evidence base as part of an evolving 

policy and regulatory position to managing the effects of hydraulic fracturing on human health 
and the environment. 

  Studies for the UK government, regulators and agencies related to the effects arising from 

unconventional oil and gas. 

  Written evidence, transcripts of committee meetings and reports from the UK House of Lords 

and the House of Commons committees of inquiry into the effects of shale gas. 

  Academic reports and peer reviewed publications on the effects from shale gas and hydraulic 

fracturing. 

  Studies produced by unconventional oil and gas developers, used as part of planning 

applications for exploration sites within the UK.  

  Other studies produced by NGOs, or single interest groups highlighting the potential effects of 

shale gas and hydraulic fracturing. 

  Other sources of information (such as online newspapers and journals). 
Studies for the EC, government and academic reports were given greater weight than the other 
sources, although steps were taken, if such other information were used, to ensure any views could 
be corroborated.  For the avoidance of doubt, no primary research was undertaken. 

iii. 

A synthesis of the information gathered was presented by environmental and human health topic, 
summarising the effects and associated risks.  This included: 
  Effects on biodiversity and nature conservation; 
  Effects on land use and geology (including induced seismicity); 

  Effects on water resources (included increased demand, and potential contamination of surface 

and groundwater); 

  Effects on air quality; 
  Effects on climate change (included fugitive methane emissions); 

  Effects on waste arisings (including consideration of solid and liquid wastes, such as drill 

cuttings and flowback water); 

  Effects on cultural heritage (included archaeology); 

                                                            

21 Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering (2012), Shale gas extraction in the UK: a review of hydraulic fracturing (Terms of 
Reference, pp 8) June 2012 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

16 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Effects on landscapes; 
  Effects on human health of workers and potentially affected communities. 
Drawing on the literature and information sourced, and for each of the topics considered, measures 
to manage the effects and associated risks of shale gas have been identified and assessed.   

Drawing on the literature and information sourced, regulations and proposals used to address the 
specific risks to the environment and human health within Europe were reviewed and summarised 
highlighting lessons that could be learned that could be relevant to the Brazilian context. 
Provisional findings of the study were presented at PROMNIP (Project MA-09) technical workshop 
on 25th and 26th November at MME auditorium in Brasilia.  Copies of the presentations were also 
provided to ANP, MME and FCO for comment.  

A draft report was completed and provided to FCO and ANP to circulate to key stakeholders.  
Comments were received from ANA, ANP, the Brazilian Geological Survey, EPE, Ibama and Shell.  
Whilst given the opportunity to comment, no response was received from MME, IBP or Petrobras.  
The report was then revised following receipt of stakeholder comment.  The revised report was then 
subject to an independent peer review by Durham University.   
Following receipt of comments from Durham University, the report was revised and finalised for 
submission to the FCO, ANP and other participants in the PROMINP project. 
Limitations 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

viii. 

ix. 

1.3.2 

This study has the following limitations: 

  The focus of the study is unconventional gas exploration and production that uses hydraulic 

fracturing and horizontal drilling (such as shale gas), referred to as ‘unconventional gas’ in this 
report.  Other unconventional fossil fuels (such as tight gas, tight oil and coal bed methane) are 
not within the scope of the study;  

  There are currently few active unconventional gas projects involving the use of hydraulic 

fracturing combined with horizontal drilling (such as shale gas) in the European Union (EU) so 
current evidence of European experience is limited.  A number of studies for either the 
European Commission (EC) or member states have reflected this limited evidence base, and so 
have drawn more widely using studies from North America in particular, where experience of 
unconventional oil and gas exploration is extensive.  However, whilst care has been taken to 
caveat such studies or draw attention to such limitations, caution needs to be applied when 
considering research which in part relates to historical practices that would not be relevant to 
the Brazilian regulatory and administrative setting;   

  A number of technical (and other) measures to address the potential environmental and health 

risks have been identified.  These have been drawn from a variety of studies for the EU, but 
which themselves are yet to be applied in the EU, and so their effectiveness remains, to some 
extent uncertain.  

  The focus of the study was on water-based fracturing.  Non-water-based and new technologies 

would require a separate assessment of risks and technical measures if these were to be 
considered as part of a risk management framework. 

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

17 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

1.4 

1.4.1 

Shale Gas Resources and Reserves 
Definitions 

Natural gas produced from shale is often referred to as “unconventional”.  What has qualified as 
"unconventional" at any particular time is a complex interactive function of resource characteristics, the 
available exploration and production technologies, the current economic environment, and the scale, 
frequency, and duration of production from the resource22.  Unconventional gas can be considered to be gas 
trapped in formations that are atypical in terms of their geological location and characteristics.   
The term "unconventional gas" actually covers three main types of natural gas resources: shale gas, tight 
gas and coalbed methane (also known as coal seam gas).  Shale gas and tight gas are reservoir rocks with 
low permeability (<0.1 mD in shales versus >1 mD in conventional reservoir sandstones) which means that 
hydrocarbons are effectively trapped and unable to flow at rates to be commercial without additional 
engineering intervention.  A combination of horizontal drilling and fracture stimulation technology is required 
to enable economic extraction of oil or gas from shale and other rocks with low permeability.  Coalbed 
methane reflects the fact that virtually all coals contain some methane as the result of coal formation which 
either adsorbs into coal micropores (<2nm) or is dispersed in pore spaces. When pressure is reduced, 
methane gas is released from the coal, which diffuses through the coal matrix and flows through the fracture 
system of the coal bed. 

“Conventional” oil and natural gas production refers to crude oil and natural gas that is produced by a well 
drilled into a geologic formation in which the reservoir and fluid characteristics permit the oil and natural gas 
to readily flow to the wellbore. 
Hydraulic fracturing is the technique used to fracture rocks of low permeability which contain hydrocarbons 
(such as shale) by the injection of water at high pressure.  Small particles (usually sand) are pumped into the 
fractures to keep them open when the pressure is released.  This enables gas, previously trapped within the 
rock matrix to flow into the well.  High-volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF) is defined by the EC23 as “injecting 
1,000 m3 or more of water per fracturing stage or 10 000 m3 or more of water during the entire fracturing 
process into a well”.   

1.4.2 

Global Context 

Figure 1.1 is a map of basins with assessed oil and shale gas formations, taken from the US Energy 
Information Administration (US EIA)24.  As can be noted, the distribution of shale gas and oil resources is 
spread throughout the world, with substantial resources in each continent.  
 

 

                                                            

22 US Energy Information Administration Glossary, http://www.eia.gov/tools/glossary/index.cfm?id=u  

23 European Union (2014), Commission Recommendation of 22 January 2014 on minimum principles for the exploration and production 
of hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high-volume hydraulic fracturing (2014/70/EU), http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32014H0070&from=EN 

24 US Energy Information Administration (2013), Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 
Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013, http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

18 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure 1.1:   Global Shale Resource Estimates  

In 2013, based on an assessment of 137 shale formations in 41 countries outside the US, the US EIA 
estimated25 the technically recoverable shale oil and gas resources for the world as follows: 

  345 billion barrels (bbls) of world shale oil resources; and 
  7,299 trillion cubic feet (tcf) (207 trillion cubic metres (tcm)) of world shale gas resources.  

By comparison, the globally technically recoverable resource of conventional gas has been estimated at 
15,256 tcf (432 tcm)26 so current estimates of shale gas represent some 32% of all Technically Recoverable 
Resources (TRRs) of gas.   

Nearly 80% of the world’s estimated technically recoverable shale gas resources are found in 10 countries, 
listed in Table 1.1.   

Table 1.1:   Top 10 Countries with Technically Recoverable Shale Gas Resources (TRR) 

Rank 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Country 

China 

Argentina 

Algeria 

U.S 

Shale gas (tcf) 

Shale (tcm) 

1,115 

802 

707 

665 

31.6 

22.7 

20.0 

18.8 

                                                            

25 US Energy Information Administration (2013), Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 
Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013, http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/ 

26 House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee (2013), The Impact of Shale Gas on Energy Markets Seventh Report of 
Session 2012–13, para22, 2013 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

19 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 1.1 (continued):   Top 10 Countries with Technically Recoverable Shale Gas Resources (TRR) 

Shale gas (tcf) 

Shale (tcm) 

Country 

Canada 

Mexico 

Australia 

South Africa 

Russia 

Brazil 

573 

545 

437 

390 

285 

245 

Rank 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

 

16.2 

15.4 

12.4 

11.0 

8.1 

6.9 

206.6 

World Total 

7,299 

Based on U.S. shale production experience, the recovery factors used ranged from 20 percent to 30 percent, with values as 
low as 15 percent and as high as 35 percent being applied in exceptional cases. 
 
The UK Energy Research Centre (UKERC) conducted a comprehensive review of 62 studies that provided 
original estimates of regional and global shale gas resources27.  This suggested that the US holds around 
10% of the global TRR of shale gas, while Europe holds around 8%. Shale gas resources could however be 
much more important at the regional level. For example, shale gas may represent 34% of the remaining TRR 
of natural gas in China, 36% in Canada, 48% in Europe and 31% in the US.  For Europe currently, 89% of 
annual gas demand is imported and one estimate suggests shale gas could reduce European import 
dependency by up to 27% by 203528. If such estimates are borne out, shale gas would represent a 
significant alternative to importing gas from other regions and provide a degree of energy independence, 
security and autonomy.  

Rapid growth in the production of shale gas in the US since 2008 has occurred following advances in 
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing.  The International Energy Agency (IEA) announced in 2009 that 
unconventional gas had "changed the game" in North America and elsewhere29.  In 2012, shale gas 
constituted 35% of total US gas production and it is forecast that it will account for 50% of total US gas 
production by 204030.  
Recent experience31 with shale gas in the US and other countries suggests that economic recoverability can 
be significantly influenced by above-the-ground factors as well as by geology. Key positive above-the-ground 
advantages in the US and Canada that may not apply in other locations include: 

  Private ownership of subsurface rights that provide a strong incentive for development;  

  Availability of many independent operators and supporting contractors with critical expertise and 

suitable drilling rigs and, pre-existing pipeline infrastructure; and  
  The availability of water resources for use in hydraulic fracturing.   

                                                            

27 McGlade, C, J Speirs, and S Sorrell (2012), A review of regional and global estimates of unconventional gas resources: A report to 
the Energy Security Unit of the Joint Research Centre of the European Union. 2012 

28 Poyry (2013), Macroeconomic effects of European Shale Gas Production, November 2013 

29 IEA (2009), World Energy Outlook 2009, Executive Summary 

30 US Energy Information Administration (2013), Annual Energy Outlook 2013, 2013 

31 House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee (2013), 3rd Report of Session 2013–14, The Economic Impact on UK Energy Policy of 
Shale Gas and Oil; UKERC, A review of regional and global estimates of unconventional gas resources, A report to the Energy Security 
Unit of the Joint Research Centre of the European commission, September 2012; US Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy 
Outlook 2013, 2013  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

20 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

In consequence, the extent to which the current technically recoverable global estimates of shale gas will be 
realised and the pace with which they will be extracted remains uncertain; however, the North American 
experience suggests that shale gas could be a significant factor in meeting future global energy needs.  
There is currently no reported offshore exploration activity for unconventional gas anywhere in the world. 
Offshore shale gas resources are excluded from global estimates. This is unlikely to change in the near 
future because there are a number of logistical and operational hurdles which make the cost of exploration 
and development uneconomic32. 

1.4.3 

The Shale Gas Opportunity in Brazil 

Brazil is thought to have considerable potential for unconventional gas production.  The US Energy 
Information Administration 2013 assessment estimates the shale gas TRR as being 6.9 trillion cubic 
metres33.  Brazil’s shale and tight gas potential exists primarily in three prospective basins: Parecis, 
Parnaíba, and Recôncavo.  These are three of 18 known onshore sedimentary basins, of which, 14 basins 
may have petroleum source rocks.  Another potentially significant resource, the São Francisco Basin, exists 
in Minas Gerais State. Consultants at Wood Mackenzie have estimated that the basin could hold up to 17 
trillion cubic metres of gas34; however, estimates of TRR of this basin are uncertain.   
Figure 1.2 presents the onshore sedimentary basins with prospectivity for shale gas in Brazil. 
 
 

 

                                                            

32 House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee (2013), The Impact of Shale Gas on Energy Markets Seventh Report of 
Session 2012–13, para22, 2013 

33 US Energy Information Administration (2013), Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 
Shale Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013, http://www.eia.gov/analysis/studies/worldshalegas/ 

34 IM, Shale Gas Prospects in Brazil, August 23, 2013 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

21 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure 1.2   Onshore Sedimentary Basins with Prospectivity in Brazil  

 

Image courtesy of CARBMAP, Brazil 
Oil and Gas Licensing in Brazil 
According to Article 176 of the Brazilian Federal Constitution, oilfields and other mineral resources belong to 
the state. Article 3 of Law No. 9.478 (the Petroleum Law) guarantees ownership of oil deposits, natural gas 
and other fluid hydrocarbons to the Federal Republic of Brazil while Article 21 states that the Federal 
Republic owns exploration and production rights on Brazilian territory. Concession holders are however 
granted ownership of extracted oil and gas (Article 26, Petroleum Law), with the proviso that they must pay 
an equivalent share of 0.5 - 1 % of the production to the landowner (Article 52, Petroleum Law). Under the 
Petroleum Law concession contracts allow both exploration and exploitation (Article 24, Petroleum Law). 
During the exploration phase, the company can evaluate and conduct test drilling in order to assess the 
economic value of the hydrocarbons (Article 24, Petroleum Law). Once the production phase has started, 
further development can take place (Article 24 Paragraph 2 Petroleum Law).  Concession contracts are 
awarded by the Brazilian National Agency of Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels (ANP) via licensing 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

22 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

rounds. Companies can participate in the bidding procedure as operators or non-operators. Multinational 
companies must form a partnership with a company registered/based in Brazil to sign a concession contract. 
The 12th licensing round offered onshore exploration that included unconventional oil and gas opportunities 
and comprised of 240 blocks in seven basins: 110 blocks covering 164,477 km2 located in the Acre, Parana, 
Parecis, Parnaiba, and Sao Francisco Basins; and 130 blocks covering 3,870 km2 in the mature Reconcavo 
and Sergipe-Alagoas Basins.  Subsequently, ANP granted 72 onshore blocks totalling 47,430 km2, in five 
sedimentary basins (Acre, Parana, Parnaiba, Reconcavo and Sergipe-Alagoas) with some concessions 
signed by June 5th 201435.  Analysis and assessment is still needed to determine if the economics makes 
drilling feasible.36 It is also noted that the majority (but not all) of the licensed blocks are in more remote 
areas of the country.  In consequence, in addition to considering whether the areas are geologically suitable, 
infrastructure, such as roads and pipelines would need to be built or substantially improved.  There may also 
be a lack of local equipment and services for hydraulic fracturing, besides a trained workforce which could 
affect the pace of any future development.  Whilst acknowledging the challenges, the IEA World Energy 
Outlook projections have anticipated that unconventional gas production will start to gather pace in the early 
2020s, adding some 6 billion cubic metres to Brazilian’s annual supply of gas by 2035. 

1.4.4 

Concerns of Brazilian Society 

The Brazilian Academy of Sciences has argued that: “although the USA International Energy Agency 
suggest that the occurrence of shale gas reserves is 7.35 trillion cubic metres in the geological basins of 
Paraná, Parnaíba, Solimões and Amazonas, Reconcavo and São Francisco …. it should be noted, that 
these forecasts are totally preliminary, especially due to the petrographic, structural and geomechanical 
characteristics of the geology considered in this calculation, which can decisively influence the economy of 
their exploitation” 37. 
The Parána shale basin overlaps a large section of the Guarani Aquifer, one of the world’s largest aquifers. 
This natural resource, which extends into Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay is governed by the Guarani 
Aquifer Agreement (GAS), signed by the four countries in August 2010, with all four parties undertaking to 
protect its sustainable common use and respect the obligation of not “causing significant harm to the other 
Parties or the environment.”  In their letter requesting that shale gas exploitation be set aside from the 
licensing process, the Brazilian Academy of Sciences highlighted that: “A great part of the reserves of 
gas/shale oil of the Parana Basin in Brazil and part of the reserves in the north of Argentina are just below 
the Guarani Aquifer, the major source of high quality potable water of the South America….. In this sense it 
is not reasonable that areas of exploitation are immediately offered to companies, excluding the scientific 
community and the other regulatory agencies of the country from the access and discussion of all 
information available through studies by Universities and research institutes.  Such studies give a better 
knowledge of the intrinsic properties of the ores and their exploration conditions, as well as the 
environmental consequences of this activity that may largely overcome its possible social gains”. 
The concessions awarded for the development of unconventional fossil fuels in Acre in the Amazon basin 
are situated in the middle of indigenous lands. Large parts of the Amazon basin are classified as a 
conservation area, including areas adjacent to the areas licensed for shale development.  There are 
concerns that shale exploration in the Amazon will add to existing pressures on the forests, in an area that 
has already suffered from high levels of deforestation as a result of ever-growing demand for land38. 
It is also noted that the final declaration of the World Indigenous Peoples Conference on Territories, Rights 
and Sustainable Development, which took place in Rio in 2012, called on the UN, governments and 
corporations to abandon “false solutions to climate change” such as “hydraulic fracturing ” which “endanger 
the future of life as we know it”39. 

                                                            

35 http://www.brasil-rounds-data.anp.gov.br/relatoriosbid/Bacia/ConsolidadoBaciaDesktop and IMI, Outlook for Brazil’s Oil and Gas 
Onshore Segment, May 16, 2014 
36 IMI, Shale Gas Prospects in Brazil, August 23, 2013 
37 Brazilian Academy of Sciences Letter to President Rouseff, August 5 2013, http://jonathandealblog.com/2013/08/29/fracking-not-
welcomed-with-open-arms-in-brazil/ 
38 Leydimere J C Oliveira et al (2013), Large-scale expansion of agriculture in Amazonia may be a no-win scenario, Environ. Res. Lett. 8 
02402, http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/2/024021/article  
39 http://www.ienearth.org/kari-oca-2-declaration/  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

23 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The Federal Prosecution Office (MPF) in states of Maranhão, Bahia and Paraná filed suits (with preliminary 
injunction granted) to prohibit the practice of hydraulic fracturing, affecting existing licence holders.  These 
prohibitions were implemented in response to concerns about water and ground contamination.  ANP and 
MME have appealed against this decision but the suspension is still currently valid.  It is understood that the 
MPF is requiring further evidence and also requesting an environmental assessment of the sedimentary area 
(an AAAS), as defined in Ordinance 198/201240, before any unconventional exploration activities may go 
ahead.  

1.4.5 

Need for Regulation 

Following consultation on a draft version before the 12th licensing round, ANP published a specific resolution 
(Resolution ANP 21/2014) on 11th April 2014, aiming to regulate “well drilling followed by the employment of 
the technique of hydraulic fracturing for the production of unconventional resources". The Resolution takes 
into account both operational safety issues, as well as procedures to mitigate environmental impacts. The 
resolution defined "hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoir" as the "injection technique of pressurized 
fluids in a well, in volumes above 3,000 m³, with the objective of creating fractures in a particular rocky 
formation whose permeability is less than 0.1 mD, enabling the recovery of hydrocarbons contained in this 
formation".  
The Resolution establishes mandatory adoption of an environmental management system that contains a 
plan for the control, treatment and disposal of the generated effluents. Additionally, the Resolution requires 
the performance of preliminary studies, which are necessary for the approval of the operations by ANP, such 
as fracturing simulations and risk analysis. In relation to the performance of the activity itself, the Resolution 
provides standards to be complied with and determines the preparation of an emergency response plan.  
The Resolution also states that the approval of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs by ANP will 
depend on, among other requirements, the "presentation by the operator of the environmental permit issued 
by the competent agency, with specific authorization for operations of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional 
reservoir, when applicable". 

The environmental legislation so far does not include any requirement of specific studies or procedures 
relating to hydraulic fracturing at the federal or state level.  In both cases, such studies and procedures might 
be required as a condition for approval and issuing of environmental permits previous of drilling and 
production.  It is also possible that such studies and procedures will be defined in the scope of a set of new 
types of permitting specifically related to drilling and production of unconventionals.  It is possible that these 
requirements or new types of permits will be set down by a new resolution, or by an ordinance or other 
specific rule, in the case of federal competence. 

1.5  Report Contents 

The remainder of this report contains: 

  Section 2: Provides a brief outline of what shale and shale gas is, and a description of the likely 

activities involved in the stages of shale gas exploration and production.   

  Section 3: Provides a summary of the potential effects arising from the stages of exploration, 

production and decommissioning associated with shale gas.  Likely risks and possible 
avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures are identified for each topic area considered.  
The background research used to compile each of these topic summaries is contained in 
Appendix B. 

  Section 4: Provides an overview of the regulatory framework for shale gas exploration and 

development in Europe.   

  Section 5: Provides an outline of the policy and regulatory framework for oil and gas in Brazil 

                                                            

40 The ordinance requires the adoption of prior environmental evaluation (“environmental assessment of sedimentary area”), similar to 
Strategic Environmental Assessment leading to the identification of areas within the sedimentary basin that are either suitable, not 
suitable areas or under moratorium (because the lack of information) for exploration and production. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

24 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Section 6: Provides an outline of the potential implications for Brazilian regulations regarding 

the environmental and health effects of shale gas.  

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

25 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

2.  Shale Exploration and Production 

2.1 

Introduction 

This section describes briefly what shale and shale gas is, and then provides a description of the likely 
activities involved in the stages of shale gas exploration and production.  The effects arising from the 
activities involved in each stage are then summarised in Section 3, with substantially more detail provided in 
Appendix B of this report.    

2.2 

Shale and Shale Gas 

In conventional oil and gas accumulations, shales comprise the source rock from which hydrocarbons are 
generated following burial. Through geological time, these hydrocarbons migrate from the source rock, 
through carrier beds and ultimately accumulate in porous reservoirs (typically sandstone or carbonate) in 
discrete traps, typically located in structural highs on the margins of the basin centres.  In the case of 
unconventional hydrocarbon accumulations (such as shale gas), shale acts as both source and reservoir 
rock, with the extensive basin centres becoming the exploration targets.  
Shale41 is predominantly comprised of very fine-grained clay particles deposited in a thinly laminated texture, 
but shale gas production may also come from layers of limestone or thin clastic beds within the gross shale 
sequence. The clay particles fall out of suspension and become interspersed with organic matter, which is 
measured as the rock’s total organic carbon content (TOC). Through deep burial, these muddy strata are 
compacted and the pore water is expelled resulting in a low-permeability, potentially layered rock called 
‘shale’, which “describes the very fine-grained and laminar nature of the sediment, not the rock composition 
(which is layered). Each of these layers creates a barrier to fluid migration, and this stacked system, called 
‘composite layering’, is an effective vertical seal”42.  
Matrix permeabilities (the ability of fluids to pass through them) of typical shale are very low compared with 
conventional oil and gas reservoirs (<<0.1 mD in shales versus >0.1 mD in conventional reservoir 
sandstones, with shale gas reservoirs usually measured in nanodarcies) which means that, in shale, 
hydrocarbons are effectively trapped and unable to flow or be extracted under normal circumstances, and 
they are usually only able to migrate to conventional traps over geological time. 

2.2.1 

Shale Gas Extraction 

Additional stimulation by hydraulic fracturing (often termed ‘fracking’) is required to increase permeability 
locally around the well (see Figure 2.1). Once a well has been drilled and cased (‘completed’), explosive 
charges fired by an electric current perforate holes along selected intervals of the well within the shale 
formation from which shale gas is produced (‘production zone’).  Pumps are used to inject fracturing fluids, 
consisting of water, sand (‘proppant’) and chemicals, under high pressure into the well.  The injection 
pressure generates stresses in the shale that exceed its tensional strength, opening up existing fractures or 
creating new ones.  The fractures typically extend a few hundred metres into the rock43 and the newly 
created fractures are propped open by the sand.  Additional fluids are pumped into the well to maintain the 
pressure in the well so that fracture development can continue and proppant can be carried deeper into the 
formation44.  A well may be too long to maintain sufficient pressure to stimulate fractures across its entire 
length.  Plugs may be inserted to divide the well into smaller sections (‘stages’).  Stages are fractured 
sequentially, beginning with the stage furthest away and moving towards the start of the well.  After 

                                                            

41 ‘Shales’ targeted by the shale gas industry in the USA are more likely to be silaceous oozes (now chert) or marls (fine grained 
carbonate clay mixtures 
42 British Geological Survey (2013), The Carboniferous Bowland Shale gas study: geology and resource estimation, 2013 
43 Davies et al (2012), Hydraulic fractures: how far can they go?, Marine and Petroleum Geology (in press). 
http://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/dei/JMPG_1575.pdf 
44 American Petroleum Institute (2009), “Hydraulic Fracturing Operations – Well Construction and Integrity Guidelines (HF1) – Upstream 
Segment”. October 2009. Available via http://www.api.org 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

26 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

fracturing, the plugs are drilled through and the well is depressurised. This creates a pressure gradient so 
that gas flows out of the shale into the well.  

Figure 2.1:  Shale Gas Exploration and Production 

 

(Source: Public Health Watch and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), NB: figures are illustrative and not to scale. 
Fracturing fluid flows back to the surface (‘flowback water’) also containing saline water with dissolved 
minerals from the shale formation (’formation or produced water’).  Fracturing fluid and formation/produced 
water returns to the surface over the lifetime of the well as it continues to produce shale gas.  Although 
definitions vary, flowback water and produced water collectively constitute ‘wastewaters’. 

2.3 

Stages of Shale Gas Extraction 

The project life cycle for shale gas extraction consists of differing stages.  Each stage contains a variety of 
activities, many of which are common to both conventional and unconventional exploration and 
development.  Whilst the number of stages described in the literature45 varies, to permit a fuller description of 
activities and subsequently of the effects, the following six stages have been used (based on the stages 
used in the SEA of onshore oil and gas licensing46): 

  Non-intrusive exploration; 
  Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing; 

  Production development; 
  Production/operation/maintenance; 
  Decommissioning of wells; 

  Site restoration and relinquishment. 

The stages are described in more detail in the following subsections. 
                                                            

45 Ricardo AEA (2014), Unconventional Gas in England: Description of infrastructure and future scenarios, Report for Environment 
Agency, Ricardo-AEA/R/ED58661 February 2014, Amec et al (2014), Technical support for assessing the need for a risk management 
framework for unconventional gas extraction: final report to European Commission and DG Environment, August 2014; AEA et al (2012) 
Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations involving 
hydraulic fracturing. a report for the European Commission AEA/R/ED57281; Tyndall Centre for Climate Change (2011), Shale gas: a 
provisional assessment of climate change and environmental impacts, January 2011   
46 Amec (2013), Strategic Environmental Assessment for Further Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing: Environmental Report, report for 
DECC, December 2013 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

27 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

2.3.1 

Stage 1: Non-Intrusive Exploration 

Stage 1 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle comprises of non-intrusive 
activities including site identification, site selection and the securing of regulatory consent.  These activities 
would be largely desk-based but could include the completion of geological mapping and sampling of 
exposures if available followed by geochemical, petrographic and geomechanical testing; ambient monitoring 
(noise and air pollution) as well as mapping of the hydrological connectivity of the proposed site and 
transport surveys to inform the modelling of any effects from vehicle movements as part of any planning 
application. Ecological surveys are also likely to be required to establish a baseline from which to measure 
any potential effects and to identify any species that require specific management and care. 
Seismic testing would be undertaken during this stage.  Seismic exploration uses artificially-generated sound 
('seismic') waves to image sub-surface geological conditions. A vibration source is used to generate seismic 
waves at or near the surface (typically dynamite charges arranged in an array or a large vibrating plate 
attached to the base of a heavy duty vehicle, see below). Receiving devices called ‘geophones’ are placed in 
a geometric array on the surface to detect the seismic signal that is partially reflected back from subsurface 
geological features, such as changes in rock type or faults.  2D seismic exploration involves acquiring 
seismic data along a single line of geophones to detect the reflected seismic energy generated by the 
vibration source. It gives you data through a two-dimensional, or 2D, vertical cross-section.  3D surveys use 
a grid of geophones and vibration source points to gather seismic data over an area rather than a single 
cross-section, and from a range of different angles. This essentially provides a 3D picture of subsurface 
conditions resulting in much more detailed information for building into the geological model. 
Vibroseis is a commonly used method of seismic survey and involves the employment of large truck 
mounted vibrator units as well as support vehicles for data recording.  The truck moves along slowly 
stopping every 6 to 20 metres to lower the plate and produce a vibration. Geophones are placed along the 
same alignment on the surface to receive the seismic data. 

Construction of temporary tracks/roads may be required to facilitate site access for vibrator unit vehicles 
(should vibroseis be undertaken); however, temporary access routes can also be made from materials such 
as high density polyethylene panels.   

2.3.2 

Stage 2: Exploration Drilling and Hydraulic Fracturing 

Well Site and Pad Development 
Once a site has been identified, site preparation activities will take place.  Physical works will include the 
removal of vegetation and levelling an area of adequate size and preparing the surface to support movement 
of heavy equipment and heavy goods vehicles (HGVs) delivering drilling equipment and delivering/removing 
fracturing fluids.  Ground surface preparation would typically involve staking, grading, stripping and 
stockpiling of topsoil reserves.  A well pad would then be constructed on the levelled site using compacted 
aggregate laid on an impermeable membrane and geotextile layer.  Erosion and sediment control structures 
would be constructed around the site, along with bunds for screening and noise attenuation and pits as 
needed for retention of drilling fluid and, possibly, freshwater.  Surface water runoff would be collected and 
attenuated via perimeter ditches. 
The size of well pads at this stage vary but occupy approximately 1 - 2 hectares.  For example, Cuadrilla, a 
UK independent oil and gas exploration company is currently proposing to develop a number of 
unconventional wells in Lancashire (UK).  For one exploration site, the proposals include a 1.55 hectare well 
pad plus a further hectare of surrounding surface works.  The remainder of the Cuadrilla site is to comprise a 
further 5.5 hectares for surface water collection ditches, landscaped bunds, fencing and pipelines47.      
Well pad equipment includes pits, impoundments, tanks, hydraulic fracturing equipment, reduced emission 
completion equipment, dehydrators and production equipment such as separators, brine tanks. Additionally, 
construction of access roads and pipelines would be required.  Pipelines may be buried.  In the US, these 

                                                            

47 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014), Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement 
p.25 at: http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

28 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

associated roads and facilities are estimated48 to account for on average about 1.6 hectares of the land area 
associated with each well pad for the life of the wells. 
Seismic Arrays 
Surface seismic monitoring arrays, comprising of passive seismic monitoring devices, would be installed to 
collect seismic data to provide a baseline and to monitor the induced seismic effects from fluid injection.  For 
the proposed Cuadrilla exploratory drilling site in Lancashire, this has included eight surface arrays and 80 
buried arrays spread over a 25km2 area.  Surface arrays require shallow pits some 0.8m deep covered by a 
manhole cover, each with a small junction box (occupying 1m2 and 0.5m deep) with an estimated time of 
construction 1-2 days.  Buried arrays will be drilled boreholes, approximately 100m deep drilled by a truck 
mounted rig, capped with a concrete pad and an inspection collar, requiring around 4 days to install. The 
arrays will be used to measure the induced seismicity that could arise from the hydraulic fracturing with 
results compared, in the UK, to a “traffic light” system49.  The UK uses the following thresholds:  

  Green’ would mean magnitude of 0 ML which would mean injection could proceed as planned; 
  ‘Amber’ would mean a magnitude of between 0 to 0.5 ML would mean that injection could 

proceed with caution, possibly at reduced rates and that monitoring is intensified; and 

  ‘Red’ is defined as a magnitude 0.5 ML or higher, where injection is suspended immediately and 

the pressure of fluid in the well is also reduced immediately. 

The level of 0.5 ML is well below what could be felt at the surface.   
Drilling 
Wells for shale gas development using hydraulic fracturing in the US are drilled by rotary rigs - these are 
typically either 12 to 14 metre “singles” or 21 to 24 metre high “doubles”.  These rigs can hold either one or 
two joined lengths of drill pipe. “Triple” rigs are over 30 metres high and may see increasing use for shale 
gas development.  Within the UK, recent proposals have included drill rigs in the range of 30-50m high.50  

Operators may use a single drilling rig for the entire wellbore or alternatively may make use of two or three 
rigs in sequence- but only one rig will drill at any one time. Typically, the rig used for the vertical portion of 
the well bore is smaller than that used to drill the horizontal section- a triple rig may be used for this purpose.  
Auxiliary equipment includes tanks for water, fuel and drilling mud, generators, compressors, solids control 
equipment, choke manifold, accumulator, pipe racks, and an office space. Fuel storage tanks associated 
with larger rigs would need to be able to accommodate about 45,000 to 54,000 litres. 
A series of holes (‘wellbores’) of decreasing diameter and increasing depth are drilled and lined with steel 
casing joined together to form continuous ‘strings’ of casing: 

  Conductor casing. Set into the ground to a depth of approximately 30 metres, the conductor 

casing serves as a foundation for the well and prevents caving in of surface soils. 

  Surface casing. The next wellbore is drilled and sealed with a casing that runs past the bottom 

of any freshwater bearing zones (including but not limited to drinking water aquifers) and 
extends all the way back to the surface. Cement is pumped down the wellbore and up between 
the casing and the rock until it reaches the surface. 

 
 

                                                            

48 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011), “Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs,” Revised Draft, September 2011 
49 DECC (2012), Ministerial Statement by Edward Davey: Exploration for shale gas, 13 December 2012, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/written-ministerial-statement-by-edward-davey-exploration-for-shale-gas  and  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/traffic-light-monitoring-system-shale-gas-and-fracking  
50 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014), Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement 
p.39 at: http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

29 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Intermediate casing. Another wellbore is drilled and lined by an intermediate casing to isolate 

the well from non-freshwater zones that may cause instability or be abnormally pressurised. The 
casing may be sealed with cement typically either up to the base of the surface casing or all the 
way to the surface. 

  Production casing. A final wellbore is drilled into the target rock formation or zone containing 

shale gas. Once fractured, the shale gas produces into the well. This wellbore is lined with a 
production casing that may be sealed with cement either to a safe height above the target 
formation up to the base of the intermediate casing; or all the way to the surface, depending on 
well depths and local geological conditions. 

Figure 2.1 shows the completed casing string for a completed horizontal well, highlighting the importance of 
overlap and cementation to the surface. 

Figure 2.1:  Cross Section of Typical Horizontal Well, Detailing Casing   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

30 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Section 4.4 of the Oil and Gas UK Well Integrity Guidelines outlines the detailed requirements for casing 
design51 and the API requirements note the specific casing and cementing requirements for hydraulic 
fracturing.   
In order to control where fracturing occurs within the horizontal component of the wellbore, the well case 
must be perforated at target locations.  These perforations can be set into the casing using ‘frac sleeves’ 
which can be mechanically opened.  In the event that these sleeves fail to open, the casing can be 
perforated using abrasive jetting techniques or through the use of small shaped explosive charges.   
The last steps prior to fracturing are the installation of a wellhead which is designed and pressure-rated for 
the fracturing operation. The system is then pressure tested. 
Hydraulic Fracturing 
Once the casing has been perforated and tested, fracturing fluid can be pumped into the well at high 
pressure causing fractures in the rock.  Hydraulic fracturing will be performed over multiple stages over 
lengths of casing (for example, Cuadrilla proposed to perform between 30-45 hydraulic fractures, each over 
approximately 50m of casing length).  Pressure testing and monitoring will take place in advance of and 
during each fracture stage (including): 

  Equipment rig up and testing, including testing the integrity of all high pressure equipment 

(fracturing wellhead, flowlines, manifolds, piping and pump equipment). 

  Monitoring pressure on the production string and all well annuli during rig up and testing. 
  Continuously monitor and recording the pressures in the annulus between the intermediate 

casing and the production casing and records are maintained.  

  Monitoring any adjacent or offset wells for pressure on the production string and other well 

annuli, as required.  

The range of fluid pressures used in high volume hydraulic fracturing is typically 10,000 to 15,000 psi (700 – 
1000 bar), and exceptionally up to 20,000 psi (1400 bar). This compares to a pressure of up to 10,000 psi 
(700 bar) for a conventional well. 
For hydraulic fracturing, JRC (2013) suggests that a horizontal well would require 15,000 m3 of fracture fluid 
and the well would be fractured twice during its lifetime (initial fracturing and one refracture)52.  However, 
AEA (2012) note that horizontal shale gas wells typically use 10,000 to 25,000 m3 water per well, based 
largely on US analysis53.  The AEA report also summarised the limited evidence from activity in Europe, 
which gave a range:  9000 – 29,000 m3/well (from Cuadrilla in Holland); 1,600m3 (Halliburton at Lubocino-1 
well in Poland); 7,000m3 – 8,000m3 (the Danish Energy Agency).  Industry estimates 54 suggest ranges of 
10,000m3 to 20,000m3.  Cuadrilla indicate that it is likely they could use between 22,375m3 and 28,000m3 per 
well in their planning application55 for the exploratory drilling site in Lancashire. 
In order to induce and maintain permeability, and generate productive fractures, chemicals are added to the 
water to create hydraulic fracturing fluid, the composition of which is dependent on site specific conditions 
including the underlying geology.  Evidence suggests that up to 750 chemicals were used between 2005 and 
2009 in shale gas drilling throughout the US.  Typically, fracturing fluid includes 56: 

                                                            

51 http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk/publications/publications.cfm.  See also API HF1 – Hydraulic Fracturing Operations – Well Construction 
and Integrity Guidelines (http://api.org/publications-standards-and-statistics.aspx). 
52 Gandosi, L (2013) An overview of hydraulic fracturing and other formation stimulation technologies for shale gas production, A Joint 
Research Centre report (EUR 26347 EN) 
53 AEA et al (2012), Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe, report for the European Commission AEA/R/ED57281 
54 http://www.total.com/en/energies-savoir-faire/petrole-gaz/exploration-production/secteurs-strategiques/gaz-non-conventionnels/focus-
gaz-de-schiste/environmental-challenges 
55 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014), Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement  
Appendix B – Scheme Parameters, page B8 
56 King (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101. Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34-42 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

31 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Water: about 98-99% of total volume; 
  Proppant: about 1-1.9% of total volume, usually sand or ceramic particles.  The proppant is 

forced into the fractures by the pressured water, and holds the fractures open once the water 
pressure is released.; 

  Friction reducer: about 0.025% of total volume, usually polyacrylamide; 

  Disinfectant: about 0.005% to 0.05%, usually glutaraldehyde, quaternary amine or tetrakis 

hydroxymethyl phosphonium sulphate; 

  Surfactants: 0.05-0.2%; 
  Gelation chemicals (thickeners): usually guar gum or cellulose polymers; 

  Scale inhibitors: phosphate esters or phosphonates; 
  Hydrochloric acid may be used in some cases to reduce fracture initiation pressure; 
  Corrosion inhibitor, used at 0.2% to 0.5% of acid volumes, and only used if acid is used. 

In the UK, Cuadrilla has released details of the composition of fracturing fluid used in hydraulic fracturing at 
Preese Hall, Lancashire57.  Results from the Preese Hall-1 Well show that over six fracturing episodes, the 
following volumes of substances were used as fracturing fluid: 

  8,399m3 of fresh water (sourced from the region’s water supply company, United Utilities); 
  462 tonnes of sand (sourced from Sibelo UK); 

  3.7m3 of friction reducer (polyacrylamide emulsion in hydrocarbon oil); and  
  4.25 kg of chemical tracer (consisting of water and sodium salt). 

In the UK, the environmental regulator (the Environment Agency in England, the Scottish Environmental 
Protection Agency in Scotland and Natural Resources Wales in Wales) will assess whether a substance 
proposed for use in well stimulation is hazardous or a non-hazardous pollutant using a methodology that 
follows the requirements of the Groundwater Daughter Directive58 as part of the environmental permitting 
process.  

In an initiative proposed by the UK Onshore Oil and Gas, as part of best practice guidance59, operators will 
be required to disclose the chemical additives of fracturing fluids on a well-by-well basis.  
Well Completion 
Following the release of pressure, some of the liquid that is injected returns to the surface through the drilled 
well.  This fluid is known as ‘flowback water’ and is typically very saline and contains minerals dissolved from 
the rocks. The proportion of fracturing fluid that returns as flowback water varies between wells, with some 
US studies reporting flowback of between 10 – 40% of the fracturing fluid60 , although other studies report 
that flowback can be as high as 75%.61  The volume of flowback water returned depends on the properties of 
the rock formation (such as the geology of the host formation and mobility of naturally occurring compounds), 
fracturing design and the type of fracturing fluid used.62   

                                                            

57 Cuadrilla (2013) Composition of Components in Bowland Shale Fracturing Fluid for Preese Hall-1 Well 
58 www.wfduk.org/legislative-background-and-classification-results  
59 UKOOG (2015), UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines Issue 2 January 2015  
60 Halliburton (2014) Produced and Flowback Water Recycling and Reuse Economics, Limitations, and Technology, Oil and Gas 
Facilities 
61 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing. a report for the European Commission AEA/R/ED57281 
62 King GE (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101, Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34 – 42, as cited in AEA (2012) Support to 
the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons Operations involving Hydraulic 
Fracturing in Europe 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

32 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Some of the water that flows to the surface may also include produced water (water coming to the surface, 
under pressure, ‘produced’ from saturation of the host formation); however, due to the low permeabilities of 
shale, produced water is generated in very low volumes when compared with the volumes of flow back fluid 
or in contrast to the produced water that can be found in conventional oil and gas wells.  Whilst flowback 
water typically returns to the surface within the first few days or weeks following injection of fracturing fluid,  
produced water, where it occurs, is generated from the rocks across the lifetime of the well.   
Flowback water requires storage prior to any treatment or disposal.  In the US, holding ponds are used to 
store flowback water to allow the settlement of its contents.  Open storage and settlement is not permitted in 
the UK, with storage of flowback water in tanks on site as part of a closed system prior to treatment or 
disposal63.  
Recovered fracturing fluid and produced waters from wet shale formations are collected and sent for 
treatment and disposal or re-use, after treatment, where possible. 

Any natural gas that may arise from drilling and flowback fluid may be disposed of by flaring in the earlier 
exploration stages.  As an alternative to flaring, ‘green completion’ or ‘reduced emissions completions’ (REC) 
can be used which involve the capture of methane from the fracturing process for use or export off site.   

2.3.3 

Stage 3: Production Development 

The range and type of activities associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under Stage 2.  The area of land take required per 
well pad would be greater than that associated with the exploratory drilling stage reflecting the need for 
additional infrastructure such as storage tanks and on-site pipelines.  Where initial exploration drilling has 
been successful, multi-well pads are now widely used, where 6-10 wells are accommodated on a single pad 
enabling a single multistage horizontal well pad to access approximately 250 hectares of shale gas play, 
compared to approximately 15 hectares for a vertical well pad.  Further, King64 reports that a single 2.4 
hectare well pad is used to collect shale gas from a 2,400 hectare area, although the construction of well 
pads with only 1 to 2 wells is still a widespread practice at present in some states in the USA65. 
Assuming 3.6 hectares per multi-well pad, this suggests that approximately 1.4% of the land above a 
productive shale gas reservoir may need to be used to fully exploit the reservoir, or more if other indirect 
land-uses (e.g. central storage facilities, compressors and connecting pipelines) are taken into account66.  
For this ancillary infrastructure, works are likely to include further clearance of vegetation, soil loss and soil 
compaction which may have negative effects in terms of soil function and processes.   

Before gas production can commence, pipeline infrastructure must be developed to collect natural gas for 
transfer to the existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure.  
Changes will also be required at the wellhead.  In addition to the assembly of pressure-controlled devices 
and valves at the top of the wellhead, production tree or “Christmas tree” equipment at the wellpad during 
the production phase is likely to include: 

  A two-phase gas/water separator; 

  Gas metering devices (each well or shared); 
  Water metering devices (each well or shared); 
  Brine storage tanks (shared by all wells). 

                                                            

63 DECC (2014) Fracking UK Shale: Water 
64 King GE (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101, Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34 – 42, as cited in AEA (2012) Support to 
the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons Operations involving Hydraulic 
Fracturing in Europe 
65 Ricardo-AEA (2014), Unconventional Gas in England: Description of infrastructure and future scenarios, a Report for the Environment 
Agency, Ricardo-AEA/R/ED58661, February 2014  
66 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing. a report for the European Commission AEA/R/ED57281, p.31 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

33 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

A well head compressor may also be added during later years and a dehydrator may be present at some 
sites.  

2.3.4 

Stage 4: Production, Operation and Maintenance 

Produced gas flows from the wellhead to the separator through a flow line a few inches in diameter.  At the 
separator, water will be removed from the gas stream via a valve and sent to the brine storage tanks. The 
gas then continues through a meter and then to the departing gathering line which will likely follow the route 
of the wellpad access road.  From there, it is transported to a centralised compression facility. 
The necessary compression to allow gas to flow into a large transmission line for sale would typically occur 
at a centralised site. Dehydration units would also be located at the centralised compression facilities.  
Based on experience in the US, it is estimated that a centralised compression facility would service well pads 
within a 4 to 6 mile radius. The gathering system from the well to the facility would comprise PVC or steel 
pipes, with the buried lines leaving the compression facility being made of coated steel. 

During production, re-fracturing may be required in order to stimulate the flow of shale gas.  In the US, the 
frequency of re-fracturing is not certain and is estimated to be once per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  
For the purposes of their report, AEA (2012) assumed that a well would be re-fractured between 0 and 4 
times over a well lifetime of up to 40 years.  However, a recent study from the US67  suggests that 
refracturing periods could be shortening: “Operators are increasingly refracturing two to four years later [after 
initial well completion] to stimulate oil and gas production. Refracturing of 15 oil wells in the Bakken Shale 
yielded a 30% increase in estimated ultimate recovery. In the Barnett Shale, where natural gas production 
declines 3- to 5-fold within a few years, refracturing increased estimated ultimate recovery by 20%. As the 
price for oil or natural gas rises, refracturing will become increasingly common.” 
The accumulation of liquids in mature wells can impede and sometimes halt gas production.  When the 
accumulation of liquid results in the slowing or cessation of gas production, the removal of fluids is required 
in order to maintain production.  This is known as ‘liquid unloading’.     
Monitoring of the site could include ambient air monitoring, hydrostatic pressure testing of pipework and 
equipment used to transport gas, regular seismic monitoring and monitoring of fracture propagation to: (1) 
ensure early warning of unexpected leakages; and (2) obtain emissions estimates for regulators and 
government.   

2.3.5 

Stage 5: Decommissioning of Wells  

When the well is no longer economic to operate, it is taken out of service, either temporarily or permanently.  
Decommissioning takes place in accordance with established procedures in the oil and gas production 
industry.68  Wells must be properly closed to eliminate pathways to the surface or to freshwater sources. 
Procedures include the installation of a surface plug to stop surface water seepage into wellbore.  A cement 
plug is installed at the base of the lowest underground source of drinking water to isolate water resources 
from potential contamination by hydrocarbons or other substances migrating via the well bore. A cement plug 
would also be installed at the top of the shale gas formation.  Historically, wells in the US were often poorly 
plugged with various unsuitable materials from the site, leading to poor containment and potential releases of 
gas or fluids from the well69. Cement plugging is now most common for sealing wells.  
Decommissioning will require additional machinery, and potentially, construction compounds to facilitate the 
completion of well plugging and the subsequent removal of site equipment.  Associated works may require 
some site clearance.  

 

                                                            

67 Jackson R. et al (2014) The Environmental Costs and Benefits of Fracking  p.332 in: Annual Review of Environmental Resources 
2014   39:327–62   http://sites.biology.duke.edu/jackson/arer2014.pdf 
68 Oil and Gas UK (2012), “OP071 - Guidelines for the suspension and abandonment of wells" (Issue 4), and "Guidelines on 
qualification of materials for the suspension and abandonment of wells" (Issue 1), July 2012, available via: http://www.oilandgasuk.co.uk 
69 Technology Subgroup of the Operations & Environment Task Group (2011) Paper #2-25: Plugging and Abandonment of Oil and Gas 
Wells http://www.npc.org/Prudent_Development-Topic_Papers/2-25_Well_Plugging_and_Abandonment_Paper.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

34 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

2.3.6 

Stage 6: Site Restoration and Relinquishment 

Following completion, some of the land used for a well pad and associated infrastructure can be returned to 
the prior use, or to other uses. However, well established natural habitats cannot necessarily be fully 
restored following use of the land for shale gas extraction. Consequently, it may not be possible to fully 
restore a site, or to return the land to its previous status. 

2.4 

Summary 

Table 2.1 summarises the activities that could occur at each stage of the lifecycle of unconventional oil and 
gas exploration and production. 

Table 2.1:  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

Activities: Unconventional Oil and Gas 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

 
 
 

Site identification, selection, characterisation; 
Seismic surveys; 
Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 

 
  Well design and construction and completion; 
 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Hydraulic fracturing; 

Production development,  including : 

Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
Facility construction and installation; 

 
 
  Well design construction and completion; 
 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 
 
 

Provision of pipeline connections  
(Possibly) re-fracturing. 

Hydraulic fracturing; 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
 
 
 
 

(Possibly) re-fracturing. 
Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 
Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 
  Well plugging and testing; 
 
 

Site equipment removal; 
Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

 
 

Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
Site restoration and reclamation.  

Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3. 
 
 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

35 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

3.  What are the Risks and the Effects? 

3.1  Overview 

This section provides a summary of the potential effects arising from the stages of exploration, production 
and decommissioning associated with shale gas for the following topics: 

  Biodiversity and nature conservation; 
  Land use and geology (including induced seismicity); 
  Water resources; 

  Air quality; 
  Climate change; 
  Waste; 

  Cultural heritage (included archaeology); 
  Landscapes; and   
  Health. 

Likely risks and possible mitigation measures are also identified for each topic area considered.  The 
background research used to compile each of these topic summaries is contained in Appendix B.  
For each of the topics considered, Table 3.1 provides a summary of the potential environmental 
risks/impacts associated with unconventional gas exploration and production and, for comparative purposes, 
conventional oil and gas.  It draws on the review of environmental risks presented in the AEA 2012 report 
prepared for DG Environment70, supplemented by more recent studies that have considered risks on 
biodiversity and human health71.  It shows that the majority of effects associated with unconventional oil and 
gas exploration and development are also common to those associated with conventional oil and gas 
development.  Differences however do occur when considering the technologies and requirements of the 
hydraulic fracturing process itself.  With regard to the risks arising from hydraulic fracturing alone, potential 
risks are likely to include: induced seismic events; the local sourcing of water, creating additional demand 
during periods of water stress; the management of chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture 
fluid, the management of flowback water and fugitive greenhouse gas emissions.   

Table 3.1 

Potential Environmental Impacts Associated with Conventional and Unconventional Gas 
Exploration and Production 

Theme 

Biodiversity 

 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional  Un-

conventional  

Direct loss and/or fragmentation of habitat from construction and operation of 
well site and well pad activities. 

Indirect impacts on habitats/species due to, for example, disturbance from 
noise, human presence and light pollution and the introduction of invasive 
species and the exposure to pollution through causal pathways. 

 

 

 

 

 
                                                            

70 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing. a report for the European Commission AEA/R/ED57281 
71 Public Health England (2014) Review of the Potential Public Health Impacts of Exposures to Chemical and Radioactive Pollutants as 
a Result of Shale Gas Extraction: Draft for Comment, available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/332837/PHE-CRCE-009_3-7-14.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

36 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.1 (continued) 

Potential Environmental Impacts Associated with Conventional and Unconventional 
Gas Exploration and Production 

Theme 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional  Un-

conventional  

Land Use and  
Geology 

Land requirements for pad and pipelines, disruption to soil layers and 
compaction and resulting impacts on removal of land for alternative uses 
(natural or anthropogenic) and ecology/ environment impacts.   

 

Induced seismicity from hydraulic fracturing activities and the potential impact 
on well integrity, creation of geological pathways for pollutants and possible 
minor earth tremors. 

 

 (in limited 
circumstance72

) 

Water Resources  Surface spillage of pollutants such as diesel and drilling fluids and silt-laden 

run-off resulting in surface water pollution.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Surface spillage of hydraulic fracturing fluids and wastewaters resulting in 
surface water pollution. 

Well failure resulting in pollutants released from the well to groundwaters.  

Introduction of pollutants due to induced fractures providing pathways to 
groundwater resources through either pre-existing man-made or natural 
structures. 

Inappropriate selection of chemicals in hydraulic fracturing and/ or unsuitable 
assessment leading to unacceptable risks to the environment from releases. 

Water consumption associated with hydraulic fracturing activities affecting the 
availability of water resources, aquatic habitats and ecosystems and water 
quality. 

Well pad development at risk of flooding and/or resulting in increased flood risk 
off site due to increase in impermeable area and/or location of facilities in 
areas of flood risk. 

Air Quality 

Emissions to air from well pad construction and drilling resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

 

Emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

Climate Change 

Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from well pad construction and drilling. 

 

 

 

 

GHG emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities. 

GHG emissions arising from well completion. 

Fugitive GHG emissions. 

Combustion of extracted hydrocarbons generating GHG emissions. 

Waste Arisings 

Generation of construction and drilling wastes.  

Generation of flowback water following hydraulic fracturing activities. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                            

72 Davies et al (2012) Induced Seismicity and Hydraulic Fracturing for the Recovery of Hydrocarbons, Marine and Petroleum Geology 
Manuscript, https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/InducedSeismicityfull.pdf 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

37 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.1 (continued) 

Potential Environmental Impacts Associated with Conventional and Unconventional 
Gas Exploration and Production 

Theme 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional  Un-

conventional  

Cultural Heritage  Direct loss of or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes from 

construction of well pad and associated infrastructure. 

 

Indirect effects on the setting of cultural heritage assets as a result of the well 
pad construction and operation. 

Landscape 

Impacts and landscape character and visual amenity due to well pad 
construction and operation activities. 

Human Health 

Emissions to air, dust and noise associated with construction and drilling 
activities resulting in adverse impacts on nearby receptors.   

 

 

 

Contamination of drinking water supply due to hydraulic fracturing activities.   

Risks associated with the health and safety of workers onsite.   

Disturbance and nuisance issues  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





These risks and effects are discussed in more detail in the remainder of this section.  For each topic, the 
risks are identified and the measures to avoid, minimise, reduce and mitigate the effects are summarised in 
tables at the end of each sub-section.   

3.2 

Biodiversity and Nature Conservation 

Biodiversity is the variability among living organisms and the ecological complexes of which they are part; 
this includes diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems. Biodiversity is integral to the 
functioning of ecosystems which in turn, provide ‘ecosystem services’ which include food, flood 
management, pollination and the provision of clean air and water. Pressures and risks in respect of 
biodiversity in respect of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production include: direct impacts on 
habitats and species (such as through fragmentation, water abstraction and discharge); indirect impacts 
through air and water contamination; and indirect and cumulative effects such as climate change and the 
ability of plants and animals to respond.  

3.2.1 

Effects on Biodiversity and Nature Conservation 

Non-intrusive Exploration  
There is potential for disturbance to sensitive species arising from seismic survey work, particularly if this 
was to occur during the breeding season.  Whilst there is a considerable body of research in respect of 
potential effects arising from seismic surveys in the marine environment73, there is no known evidence of 
onshore surveys resulting in adverse impacts on biodiversity.  The literature reviewed as part of this study 
(see Appendix B.1) does not identify seismic surveys themselves as representing a significant risk to 
ecology, although associated vehicle movements and/or the installation of the arrays may result in short term 
disturbance/habitat loss. 
Should significant new road infrastructure be required to facilitate site access then there may be an 
increased risk of habitat loss, fragmentation and disturbance.   

 
 
                                                            

73 IAGC (2011), Seismic Surveys and Protecting the Marine Environment, 
http://www.iagc.org/media/files/page/ab24210c/IAGC_1_Pager_ProtectingMarineEnv_FINAL_2014_06_12.pdf   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

38 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing  
Impacts on biodiversity from this phase can arise from two separate operations: preparation for, and 
construction of, the well pad(s) and subsequently exploratory activities involving drilling, fracking, testing and 
flaring.  
Well pad construction could result in the loss and/or fragmentation of habitat, the effects being direct (such 
as loss to drilling pads and access roads, fencing of compounds and degradation of habitats due to water 
abstraction) or indirect (such as disturbance from noise, human presence and light pollution and the 
introduction of invasive species). The effects of habitat loss and fragmentation are in the relatively early 
stages of research. Typical land-take for a drilling pad and associated compound is approximately 1-2 
hectares (ha) during the exploratory drilling and hydraulic fracturing stage (compared to 1ha for conventional 
oil and gas exploration drilling). 

The nature of potential direct and indirect effects on biodiversity associated with well pad construction would 
be similar to conventional oil and gas construction activity as well as other types of development (particularly 
where this involves the development of greenfield land) although the magnitude of effect may be greater 
owing to the differences in the scale of land take and intensity of activity.      
Drilling associated with both conventional and unconventional oil and gas exploration and production may 
cause disturbance to ecological receptors.  The impact of noise disturbance on biodiversity associated with 
unconventional oil and gas drilling activity has been identified74 as an issue of particular significance, 
reflecting the fact that the drilling of wells in a well pad may take many months of continuous drilling 
depending on the number and depth of wells drilled (each well typically taking 1-2 months of 24 hours/day 
drilling although the wells proposed by Cuadrilla in Lancashire UK would take between 3 and 5 months).  
Additional identified impacts include the potential introduction of invasive species (plants, animals and micro-
organisms) associated with the importation of water and construction materials on to the site, although this 
risk would be similar to other forms of development and particularly those involving the importation of water 
(for example, activity involving the transfer of untreated water).  
During both conventional and unconventional onshore oil and gas exploration operations, the accidental 
release of substances such as diesel and drilling fluids, silt-laden run-off and the deposition of pollutants 
associated with transport movements could also negatively affect biodiversity.  With specific regard to 
unconventional oil and gas exploration, potentially polluting substances will also include hydraulic fracturing 
fluids.  Section 3.4 considers further the potential sources of pollution in this regard.    
Production Development 
There could be a range of direct effects on biodiversity associated with production development activity, 
including habitat loss (from the land take for the larger production pad75), severance (associated with road 
and pipeline construction, for example) and species disturbance including noise, human activity and light 
pollution which could affect sensitive species, particularly during the breeding season. Water used during the 
fracturing process could potentially affect habitats and species especially during times of water stress. 
Production/operation/maintenance 
Assuming that all operational activities would take place within the already identified site area, there would 
be no additional land take and hence direct effects on biodiversity.  However, there would be the potential for 
continued disturbance and/or displacement as a result of operational activities, including noise, traffic 
movements, human activity and light pollution which could affect sensitive species (such as bats), particularly 
during the breeding season.  The accidental release of pollutants, including untreated flowback water from 
refracturing could also affect both habitats and species.   

                                                            

74 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) Hydraulic fracturing for shale gas in the UK: Examining the evidence for potential 
environmental impacts.UK: RSPB p.27 and p.36 case study on bat behaviour, available via 
http://www.rspb.org.uk/forprofessionals/policy/climatechange/action/ukenergy/fit-to-frack.aspx 

75 A typical well pad and compound would be approximately 3ha (compared to 1.9ha per pad for conventional drilling) during production, 
extending to an additional 2.4ha for every hectare of well pad area, or an additional 9ha per well pad. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

39 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The main risk of groundwater contamination associated with hydraulic fracturing is commonly considered to 
be the leakage of fracturing fluid and methane as a result of inadequacies in well cementing (well integrity) or 
due to the movement of contaminants through existing faults or porous rocks to groundwater resources.  Any 
effects on groundwater could impact on water dependent habitats, such as wetlands.  An evaluation76 of 
operational impacts associated with Marcellus Shale drilling concluded that: “Water-supply contamination 
from so-called stray gas occurs more often from failures in well design and construction, breaches in spent 
hydraulic-fracturing water-containment ponds, and spills of leftover natural gas liquids used in drilling.  
Where groundwater has been impacted ... the issue stems not from hydraulic fracturing per se, but poorly 
formulated cement and improperly designed wells.”   
Additional abstraction of water to supply wells could affect wetland ecosystems through the lowering of 
groundwater levels, particularly in times of water stress.77  
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
All activities associated with decommissioning and site restoration would take place within the existing site 
area and therefore no further effects on biodiversity are anticipated. 

3.2.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 
Table 3.2 summarises the key biodiversity risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures. 
Collectively, the measures can be collated into a Biodiversity Mitigation Strategy (BMS) which is a commonly 
used method of specifying and monitoring measures which will be used to help lessen impacts associated 
with construction and operation. 

Table 3.2 

Summary of Risks to Biodiversity and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

1. 

Land required for 
the well pad 

Site selection and 
preparation and all 
subsequent stages 

Potential cumulative risks of 
impacts on removal of 
habitat, introduction of 
invasive species, noise 
disturbance, emissions to air 
and water, human activity, 
traffic, habitat degradation.  
Impacts on sensitive areas 
Impact arises from the 
degrading, fragmentation or 
removal of habitat and direct 
loss of species and indirect 
effects on foraging areas 
leading to increased stress 
on species 

a)  Site selection and avoidance of sites/areas of 

high conservation/ecological value (e.g. Natura 
2000 within Europe, designated conservation 
sites, water protection areas, reforestation 
areas).    

b)  Site selection process should include use of 
buffer zones between proposed wellsite and 
designated conservation sites, with buffer zone 
provided at least at 1km separation from the 
boundary of proposed site and the boundary of 
the designated area (NB reflects UK 
experience, and could vary depending on the 
nature of the designation).   

c)  Potential pollutant pathways between proposed 
wellpad and exploration activities and sensitive 
receptors should be identified and 
documented.  Where evidence of pathway 
which could have direct causal effect, through 
pollutant spillage, on a designated site, 
consider alternative siting, based on extended 
buffer zone and use of pollution prevention 
measures to minimise risk. 

d)  Prohibit operations within designated 

conservation sites (e.g. Natura 2000 within 
Europe, protected sites, water protection 
areas, reforestation areas) or within certain 

                                                            

76 Considine T. et al (2012) Environmental Impacts during Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, Impacts and Remedies. Shale 
Resources and Society Institute p.8. http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-
Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf 

77 See Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research (2011) Shale gas: a provisional assessment of climate change and environmental 
impacts p.59 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

40 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

distances to designated conservation sites 
(see buffer zone above).  

e)  Restrict operations within designated 

conservation sites (see above) and within 
certain distances to designated conservation 
sites to minimise disturbance from activities 
(noise from drilling and traffic movements).  

f)  Require optimisation of well pads, i.e. the 

number of wells, pad density and pad spacing 
(e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New 
York State). 

g)  Pre-construction checks and monitoring for 

protected species, either resident on the 
proposed wellsite or making use of the area for 
foraging or hunting or as part of any migration 
route.  

i) 

h)  Where proposed exploration site important for 
foraging, consider alternative location including 
use of buffer zone and/or ensure or establish 
alternative areas available to key species.  
Programming of site/vegetation clearance to 
avoid disruption to ground nesting birds. 
Ecological pre-start checks prior to each new 
phase of the project (e.g. drilling, fracturing, 
initial flow testing, extended flow testing, 
decommissioning). 

j) 

k)  Briefings and training for all site personnel prior 

to construction and each phase of the project 
regarding conduct, awareness of designated 
sites and species and awareness of any 
pollutant pathways. 

l)  Regular compliance checks undertaken by the 

Ecological Clerk of Works. 

m)  Yearly re-assessment of site vegetation to 

determine species use/presence. 

n)  Ongoing monitoring and survey work through 

operations to establish if any effects on 
sensitive receptors. 

a)  Avoid siting of well pad in areas of sites/areas 

of high conservation/ecological value (e.g. 
Natura 2000 within Europe, designated 
conservation sites).    

b)  Site selection process should include use of 
buffer zones between proposed well pad and 
designated conservation sites, with buffer zone 
providing at least at 1km separation from the 
boundary of proposed site and the boundary of 
the designated area (NB reflects UK 
experience regarding noise attenuation and 
distance).   

c)  Prohibit/restrict operations within designated 

conservation sites (e.g. Natura 2000 within 
Europe, protected sites) or within certain 
distances to designated conservation. 

d)  Prohibit/restrict operations during breeding 

season if designated conservation areas 
contain sensitive species and are within buffer 
zone. 

e)  Application of specific design measures to limit 
noise disturbance (through bunds and acoustic 
barriers, enclosed flaring, equipment 
orientation and controls on timing of 
operations), as well as measures to minimise 

2.  Noise from plant 

Drilling and 
Production 

Potential cumulative risks of 
noise on species 
populations arising from the 
disturbance of species, 
potentially important during 
breeding seasons 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

41 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

effects from lighting (orientation, cowling). 

a)  Avoid siting of well pad and ancillary 

infrastructure in areas of sites/areas of high 
conservation/ecological value (e.g. Natura 
2000 within Europe, designated conservation 
sites).    

b)  Site selection process should include use of 
buffer zones and once works started, use of 
buffer zones where the works and access 
routes are in close proximity to sensitive 
habitats. 

c)  Require optimisation of well pads, i.e. the 

number of wells, pad density and pad spacing 
(e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New 
York State) 

d)  Review and implement measures to minimise 

water use and vehicle movements. 

e)  Prohibit/restrict operations (including vehicle 

movements) during breeding season if 
designated conservation areas contain 
sensitive species and are within buffer zone. 

a)  Require good site practice to prevention of 

leaks and spills. 

b)  Require tank level alarms. 
c)  Require double skinned closed storage tanks. 
d)  Require spill kits. 
e)  Require berm around site boundary. 
f)  Require impervious site liner under pad with 

puncture proof underlay. 

g)  Require collection and control of surface runoff. 
h)  Avoid the use of persistent, bio-cumulative and 
toxic, carcinogenic and mutagenic chemicals. 

i)  Require good site security. 
j)  Require pollution incident emergency response 

plan. 

k)  Require pollution prevention training.  

See measures proposed for issue 4. 

See measures proposed for issue 22. 

Potential cumulative risks of 
impacts on removal of 
habitat (for construction of 
access roads), introduction 
of invasive species, noise 
disturbance, emissions to air 
and water, human activity, 
traffic, habitat degradation.  
Impacts on sensitive areas. 
Impact arises from the direct 
loss of species through 
roadkill and disturbance of 
species, potentially 
important during breeding 
seasons 

Accidents and spillages can 
result in contamination (e.g. 
through tank ruptures, 
equipment and 
impoundment failures, 
overfills, vandalism, 
accidents, fires, poor 
operational practice) 
Impact arises from the 
degradation of habitats and 
potential direct loss of 
species.   

Accidents and spillages can 
result in contamination (e.g. 
through tank ruptures, 
equipment and 
impoundment failures, 
overfills, vandalism, 
accidents, fires, poor 
operational practice, 
blowouts) 
Impact arises from the 
degradation of habitats and 
potential direct loss of 
species.   

Fluid contaminants 
transferred to groundwater 
and then to surface water 
via induced fractures 
extending beyond target 
formation, through bio-
geological reactions with 
chemical additives, via pre-
existing fractures / faults, via 
pre-existing man-made 

3. 

Vehicle 
movements 

Vehicle movements 
associated with 
construction, water, 
flowback and 
produced water 
management 

4. 

Spillages of 
chemicals 

Chemical 
transportation, 
storage and mixing 

5.  Spillages of 
flowback or 
produced water 

Fracturing 

Hydraulic fracturing 

6. 

Injection of 
pollutants into 
ground arising 
from injection 
activities 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

42 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

Pipeline route 

Pipeline construction 

7. 

structures, well casing 
failures 
Impacts is pollution of 
aquifers and surface waters 
with adverse effects on 
aquatic ecology. 

Linear feature may 
adversely affect biodiversity, 
particularly in sensitive area 
and lead to habitat 
severance and 
fragmentation 

8.  Remaining legacy 

land use post 
abandonment 

Abandonment 

It may not be possible to 
fully restore sites 

a)  Seek to site well pad close to existing pipeline 
infrastructure, if available, to minimise need for 
new pipeline. 

b)  For any new pipeline that is required, 

preferentially follow routes of existing linear 
infrastructure to minimise land take and 
disturbance on undeveloped land.  

c)  During planning application process, require 
environmental impact assessment (EIA)* for 
proposed pipeline. 

d)  Use of buffer zones where the works and 

access routes are in close proximity to 
sensitive habitats. 

e)  Consider species pathways/crossings of linear 

feature at key points to avoid severance  

a)  Require land disturbed during well construction 
and development to be reclaimed and restored 
as soon as possible 

b)  Require habitat restoration and/or 

enhancement using native plantings before site 
relinquishment. 

c)  Require post abandonment monitoring**.  
d)  Require post abandonment emergency plan. 
e)  Require post abandonment well inspection. 
f)  Note: Transfer of responsibility of site to 

competent authority only after satisfactory 
reinstatement of habitat and sufficient 
monitoring of site to demonstrate no sustained 
risk to biodiversity.  

*All activities associated with unconventional gas exploration and production (subject to specific regulatory thresholds) 
are likely to require EIA. 
**In the UK, arrangements for post abandonment monitoring are currently being agreed between operators and the 
Government. 

3.3 

Land Use and Geology  

Land use in this context is concerned with the effective use of land, i.e. by encouraging the reuse of land that 
has been previously developed (brownfield land) as well promoting sustainable patterns of land use, e.g. in 
relation to the protection of open spaces and green infrastructure.  Geology and soils is concerned with 
important geological sites, the contamination of soils and high quality agricultural land. 
The principal effects are anticipated to be associated with cumulative land-take, compaction of soils, induced 
seismicity, contamination and waste disposal, although in all cases, appropriate mitigation can be employed 
to either reduce risks or long term effects.  

3.3.1 

Effects on Land Use and Geology 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
There may be a requirement for the temporary construction of new roads to facilitate access to sites and this 
could result in the loss of greenfield land and soils, disruption to soil layers/compaction and may obstruct the 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

43 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

use of land (e.g. for agricultural use).  Where soils are high agricultural quality these effects may be more 
severe.   
Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
Principal effects relate to land-take associated with exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing, amounting to 
1-2 ha pad (which compares to 1 ha per pad for conventional oil and gas exploration drilling).  Further land-
take would be required for access roads.  In the US, these associated roads and facilities are estimated78 to 
account for on average about 1.6 hectares of the land area associated with each well pad for the life of the 
wells.  Like other large scale developments, cumulatively there could be significant effects in a locality which 
could influence farming viability for some landholdings.   

In addition to the direct land take, and removal of top soil, well pad construction could lead to disruption of 
soil layers and compaction which may affect soil function and processes.  Economically, such effects would 
be important, where land take involved activities on high quality agricultural land.  However, such impacts 
are generally shared with other large construction projects (particularly those located on greenfield sites) and 
soil stripping and storage and land restoration could help to mitigate this impact.  Notwithstanding, it is 
recognised that in areas of intensive agriculture, effects on existing communities/businesses may be more 
pronounced. 
There is potential for induced seismicity associated with fracturing activity.  In the UK, in 2011, there were 
two instances of induced seismicity attributed to hydraulic fracturing79 with one seismic event of magnitude 
2.3 ML and the second of magnitude 1.5 ML. In addition to the UK, induced seismicity associated with 
hydraulic fracturing has been identified in other shale gas fields located in the USA and Canada. Hydraulic 
fracturing for shale gas in these fields is known to have induced 79 seismic events with a magnitude >1. The 
largest of these was an earthquake of magnitude 3.8 ML, which occurred in the Horn River Basin of British 
Columbia, Canada80. It was felt, but caused no recorded damage.  In this context, Davies et al81  state that, 
when compared with other sources of induced seismicity such as mining and reservoir impoundment, 
“hydraulic fracturing has been, to date, a relatively benign mechanism.  It is possible that fault reactivation by 
hydraulic fracturing might cause induced seismicity larger than that recorded to date, but a fuller 
understanding of shale geology can mitigate against this risk ” and that the likelihood of hydraulic fracturing 
“causing felt seismicity (M>3) is very small”.  Similarly, the AEA (2012)82 conclude that: “In view of the low 
frequency of reported incidents, it is judged that the frequency of significant seismic events is “rare” and the 
potential significance of this impact is “slight.” Multiple development could increase the risk of seismic events 
due to one operation affecting the well integrity of a separate operation, although in view of the low 
frequency of the reported events and the established measures for monitoring well integrity, the risks are 
judged to remain low.”  Recent research83 adds that: “Events of this size(3.6 ML) ... might be sufficient to 
cause minor damage to property, such as cracked plaster; however, such occurrences, if they ever occur, 
will be infrequent.”  Notwithstanding, in some locations where buildings are of poor construction and slope 
stability is poor, it is recognised that events of this magnitude could cause minor property damage.  Within 
the UK, any induced seismicity is monitored and compared with a “traffic light” system84 which depending on 
a seismic events’ magnitude could lead to temporary suspension of any hydraulic fracturing activity.   

                                                            

78 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011), “Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs,” Revised Draft, September 2011 
79 Green C., Styles P.; Baptie B. (2012) Preese Hall Shale Gas Fracturing Review and Recommendations for Induced Seismic Mitigation 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/15745/5075-preese-hall-shale-gas-fracturing-review.pdf 
80 Davies, J.D. Foulgar, G., Bindley, A., Styles, P. (2013) What size of earthquakes can be caused by fracking?  DEI Briefing Note April 
2013. Durham University: Durham 
81 Davies, J.D. Foulgar, G., Bindley, A., Styles, P. (2013) What size of earthquakes can be caused by fracking?  DEI Briefing Note April 
2013. Durham University: Durham. 
82 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe: AEAT, report for the European Commission, 2012, p.54 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf 
83 Westaway R. & Younger P. (2014) Quantification of potential macroseismic effects of the induced seismicity that might result from 
hydraulic fracturing for shale gas exploitation in the UK, Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology (forthcoming - 
published online November 11, 2014, doi:10.1144/qjegh2014-011) 
http://qjegh.geoscienceworld.org/content/early/2014/10/29/qjegh2014-011.full.pdf+html 
84 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/traffic-light-monitoring-system-shale-gas-and-fracking  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

44 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

There is the potential for the disturbance of contaminated land through construction and drilling activities and 
contamination by spillage during exploration production phases, although in both cases appropriate 
mitigation can be employed to reduce these risks.  
Production development 
The range and type of effects associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under exploration drill and hydraulic fracturing.  
During this stage, land take would equate to around 3ha (which compares to 1.9ha per pad for conventional 
oil and gas exploration drilling) with potentially further land-take required for pipe lines. 

During this stage further hydraulic fracturing could be required but the risk of induced seismicity, providing 
there are appropriate safeguards, is judged to be small.    
Production/operation/maintenance 
Based on the assumption that there would be no additional land take and that the risk of induced seismicity 
and land contamination from operational activities would be low, this stage has been assessed as having a 
neutral effect on land use, geology and soils. 
Decommissioning and site restoration   
There are anticipated to be no long term effects associated with these phases, in light of employing 
appropriate mitigation.  

3.3.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.3 summarises the key land use risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures. 

Table 3.3 

Summary of Risks to Land Use and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

Site selection and 
preparation 

9. 

 

Land required 
for the well 
pad, include 
on site 
storage of 
flowback 
water and 
produced 
water 

Potential cumulative 
impacts.  A typical pad and 
ancillary infrastructure 
occupies approximately 
3.6ha during exploration 
and production and well 
pads containing multiple 
well could have a density 
ranging from one pad per 
250ha – 2,500 ha (which, 
depending on location and 
other land uses could 
increase competition for 
land).    
Potentially isolated impacts 
can also occur if even only 
a few small well pads are in 
direct conflict with nearby or 
adjacent sensitive land 
uses such as residences, 
schools, hospitals, etc. 
Impact is removal of land 
from other uses (e.g. 
natural habitat, agriculture, 
industry, and housing), 
lower ecological status, 
impact on local land use 
planning and adjacent land 
usage 

a)  Appropriate site selection to avoid sensitive 
areas (high land, agricultural and ecological 
value locations).  

b)  Require compatibility with current and future 
potential land use (Natura 2000 sites within 
Europe, conservation sites, human use, 
industrial use, appropriate zoning). 

c)  Require use of buffer zones, to minimise 
effects on other land uses (and effects on 
sensitive receptors) such as residential areas, 
schools hospitals and other sensitive 
areas(e.g. industry good practice 
requires1,600m distance where possible).   

d)  Require optimisation of well pads, i.e. the 

number of wells, pad density and pad spacing 
(e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New 
York State). 

e)  Where necessary, sites should be carefully 

stripped of topsoils prior to construction works 
commencing to avoid damage.  All soils should 
be handled in suitable conditions (e.g. dry 
weather) and the most appropriate method of 
soil handling should be used.  Soils should be 
stored in allocated heaps and protected from 
erosion, contamination or degradation.   
 

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

45 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.3 

Summary of Risks to Land Use and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

10. 

 

Pipeline 
construction 

Pipeline construction 
and operation 

Pipeline corridors and their 
right of way and/or 
maintenance easements 
may sever properties, 
preventing or compromising 
the continuous and 
unencumbered use of 
surface property and 
causing a loss of surface 
property value 

11.  

Remaining 
legacy land 
use post 
abandonment 

Abandonment 

It may not be possible to 
fully restore sites 

a)  Seek to site well pad close to existing pipeline 
infrastructure, if available, to minimise need for 
new pipeline. 

b)  For any new pipeline that is required, 

preferentially follow routes of existing linear 
infrastructure to minimise land take and 
disturbance on undeveloped land.  

c)  During planning application process, require 
environmental impact assessment (EIA)* for 
proposed pipelines. 

d)  Use of buffer zones where the works and 

access routes are in close proximity to 
sensitive habitats. 

e)  Consider pathways/crossings of linear feature 

at key points to avoid severance 

a)  Require land disturbed during well construction 
and development to be reclaimed and restored 
to previous use condition as soon as possible 

b)  Require post abandonment monitoring.  
c)  Require post abandonment emergency plan. 
d)  Require post abandonment well inspection. 
e)  Note: Transfer of responsibility of site to 

competent authority only after satisfactory 
reinstatement of habitat and sufficient 
monitoring of site to demonstrate no sustained 
risk to biodiversity. 

*All activities associated with unconventional gas exploration and production (subject to specific regulatory thresholds) 
are likely to require EIA. 
Table 3.4 summarises the key induced seismicity risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation 
measures.  

Table 3.4 

Summary of Risks from Induced Seismicity and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

12. 

 

Fracturing 

Well injection of 
hydraulic fracturing 
fluid 

Potential for minor earth 
tremors (e.g. the largest of 
the earth tremors at the 
Preese Hall well in the UK 
during April and May 2011 
had a magnitude of 2.3 
following hydraulic 
fracturing).  An event of this 
size at an expected depth of 
2-3 km is unlikely to cause 
structural damage though it 
may be felt close to the 
epicentre 
Multiple developments could 
increase the risk of events 
affecting other operations, 
e.g. affecting well integrity. 
 

a)  Competent authorities compile regional maps of 

underground resources.  

b)  Operator to review available information on 

geology, structure (including faults) and in situ 
stresses in the vicinity of the proposed site to 
avoid hydraulically fracturing into, or close to, 
existing critically stressed faults. 

c)  Operator to conduct 2D/3D geophysical 
(seismic ) surveys to identify faults and 
fractures. 

d)  Operator to engage with third parties (e.g. 
regulators, other operators, researchers) to 
ensure fully aware of any issues / proximity 
(e.g. to other underground activities).  Sharing 
of information to ensure that all operators in a 
gas play are aware of risks and can therefore 
plan.  

e)  Require development of geo-referenced 

database of the zone before work commences 
covering geology, groundwater flows, 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

46 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measure 

pathways, natural microseismicity.  Require 
ongoing development as data is collected 
through exploration. 

f)  Carry out modelling and risk based 

geomechanical assessments of proposed 
hydraulic fracturing with regard to faults 
(including maximum magnitude estimates). 
g)  Apply ground motion prediction models to 

h) 

assess the potential impact of induced 
earthquakes. 
Identify potential seismic receptors within a 
defined radius of the well site (5km) including: 
wells, infrastructure, special buildings, 
residential buildings and industrial/commercial 
buildings.  Avoid high seismicity risk areas. 

i)  Require minimum distance between hydraulic 
fracture pipes and geological strata containing 
aquifers (e.g. ~literature review has identified 
range from between 600m -1,000m depending 
on source and country) and the surface (e.g. 
any activity closer than the specified  depth 
requires special permit). 

j)  Require appropriate well design, construction, 

testing and monitoring.  

k)  A Hydraulic Fracturing Programme85 similar to 
that in operation in the UK should be prepared 
by the operator and agreed with the relevant 
regulator. 

l)  Require smaller preinjection prior to main 

operations to enable induced seismicity 
response to be assessed, followed by 
succession of injections over short duration of 
casing length. 

m)  Monitor the fracture growth and direction during 

hydraulic fracturing using buried microseismic 
arrays to ensure hydraulic fractures / pollutants 
do not extend beyond the gas-producing 
formations and do not result in seismic events 
or damage to buildings/installations that could 
be the result of fracturing. 

o) 

n)  Monitoring background induced and natural 
seismicity before, during and after hydraulic 
fracturing. 
Implementation of a Traffic Light System (via 
the surface seismic monitoring array) and 
cessation of operation if induced seismic event 
exceeds agreed threshold e.g. within UK, it is 
0.5ML. 

p)  Determine the presence and levels of methane 

in groundwater, including drinking water 
through sampling of shallow groundwater 
during wet and dry periods and/or borehole to 
sample deep groundwater and characterise the 
hydrological series.  

                                                            

85 UKOOG (2013) guidelines suggest Hydraulic Fracturing Programmes (HFP) are developed “that describes the control and mitigation 
measures for fracture containment and for any potential induced seismicity” (See Appendix B.3.10 and 
http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelinesIssue2.pdf).  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

47 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

3.4  Water Resources  

Risks to water quality and resources arising from unconventional oil and gas activities include, in particular: 
surface water contamination from surface spills; groundwater contamination arising from surface spills, loss 
of well integrity and fracture propagation; the treatment of wastewater (considered in Section 3.7); and the 
use of water during exploration and production.  
Onshore oil and gas exploration and production could both be affected by flooding (for example, where well 
pads are located in areas prone to flooding) or exacerbate flood risk off site (for example, due to increased 
surface water runoff).   

3.4.1 

Effects on Water Resources 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
No effects on water resources or flood risk would be expected during this stage. 
Exploration Drilling and Hydraulic Fracturing  
Surface Spills 
Surface spills/leaks of fracturing and other fluids including, for example, drilling muds/cuttings and flowback 
water is one of the most common causes of water contamination associated with onshore oil and gas 
exploration and production86.  Sources of surface spills/leaks could include: well ‘blowouts’; vehicle 
accidents; or inadequate storage of hydraulic fracturing fluids and flowback water.  The Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT, 201187) reviewed 43 incidents of environmental pollution related to natural gas 
operations including shale gas and identified that, alongside groundwater contamination by natural gas or 
drilling fluid (47% of total incidents), surface spills of stored hydraulic fracturing fluids and flowback water 
(33% of total incidents) are the most widely reported causes of water contamination.  Blowouts, meanwhile, 
represented only a small proportion (4%) of incidents.  Similarly, an analysis of notices of violations (NOVs) 
from the Pennsylvania Marcellus Shale industry between January 2008 and August 2011 by Considine et al 
(2012)88 highlights that blowouts (and venting) represented only 0.9% of all NOVs. In this respect, The Royal 
Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) highlight that blowouts are rare and that whilst some 
shales can be over-pressurised, blowout is unlikely because shale has very low permeability89.  
Research90 indicates that surface spills arising from oil and gas exploration and production activities 
generally do not have major environmental impacts as they are often small, take place on the well pad and 
are contained within the boundaries of well pad sites through the implementation of control measures and 
best practice.  Where there are major environmental events, the impacts are often mitigated.  
Notwithstanding, the significance of any effect is dependent on the amount and type of fluids spilled and the 
sensitivity of the receiving environment.     
Hydraulic Fracturing 
During hydraulic fracturing, water is injected into the well at high pressures causing fractures in the rock.  In 
order to induce and maintain permeability, and generate productive fractures, chemicals are added to the 
water to create hydraulic fracturing fluid, the composition of which is dependent on site specific conditions 
including the underlying geology91.  Within the UK92, operators disclose the composition of the fracturing 

                                                            

86 Groat and Grimshaw (2012), Fact-based regulation for environmental protection in shale gas development, Energy Institute, 
University of Texas: Austin. Available from:  http://cewc.colostate.edu/wp content/uploads/2012/02/ei_shale_gas_regulation120215.pdf  
(accessed on September 2013) 
87Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2011). Study on the Future of Natural Gas. Available from 
http://mitei.mit.edu/publications/reports-studies/future-natural-gas  (accessed November 2014)) 
88 Considine, T. Waterson, R. Considine, N. Martin, J. (2012) Environmental Impacts During Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, 
Impacts, and Remedies 
89 The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing 
90 Considine, T. Waterson, R. Considine, N. Martin, J. (2012) Environmental Impacts During Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, 
Impacts, and Remedies 
91 The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing 
92 UKOOG (2015), UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines Issue 2 January 2015 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

48 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

fluids on a well-by-well basis through the UK Onshore Operators Group (UKOOG) website.  Information 
disclosed will include: 

  Any EA/SEPA authorisations for fluids and their status as hazardous/non-hazardous 

substances. 

  Material Safety Data Sheets information. 

  Volumes of fracturing fluid, including proppant, base carrier fluid and chemical additives. 
  The trade name of each additive and its general purpose in the fracturing process. 
  Maximum concentrations in percent by mass of each chemical additive. 

Theoretically, indirect water pollution could occur93 through the migration of contaminants from the target 
fracture formation through subsurface pathways including: the outside of the wellbore itself; other wellbores 
(such as incomplete, poorly constructed, or older/poorly plugged wellbores); fractures created during the 
hydraulic fracturing process; or natural cracks, fissures and interconnected pore spaces.   

Evidence94 95 suggests that local geological conditions may influence the potential for contamination with the 
most important parameters and conditions affecting the migration of contaminants from target formations to 
groundwater being: matrix permeability (i.e. the ability of fluids and gas to flow through the shale gas 
reservoir); fracture permeability (i.e. the permeability of the shale following hydraulic fracturing); distance 
between the aquifer and the target formation; and the pressure regimes in the aquifer and the target 
formation96.  The likelihood of such effects is highly uncertain given the distances between shale gas 
formations and groundwater.  For example, modelling97 of fracture pathways within the Marcellus shale 
formation across Pennsylvania, New York and West Virginia suggests that there is “substantial geologic 
evidence that natural vertical flow drives contaminants, mostly brine, to near the surface from deep evaporite 
sources.  Interpretative modelling shows that advective transport could require up to tens of thousands of 
years to move contaminants to the surface, but also that fracking the shale could reduce that transport time 
to tens or hundreds of years.  Conductive faults or fracture zones, as found throughout the Marcellus shale 
region, could reduce the travel time further.”   
The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) summarised the findings of a study which 
compared fracture growth and depth of overlying water sources in four major US shale formations between 
2001 and 2010.  Seismic data indicated that the minimum vertical distances between the bottom of the 
aquifer and the top of the fracture varied between 1,200m and 6,000m, depending on the formation.  From a 
European perspective, the risk of contamination as a result of the hydraulic fracturing process is widely 
regarded to be low due to the likely distance between the fractures and aquifers.  AEA (2012) note that most 
but not all shale gas reservoirs in Europe exhibit a separation of more than 600m between the depth of shale 
gas formations and aquifers and given research by Davis et al (2012) indicated that the maximum length of 
fractures (from hydraulic fracturing) as 588m, although the majority of fractures are less than 100m, this 
suggests that such a separation may be sufficient to avoid any migration of fluid98.  .  However, where 
hydraulic fracturing takes place at shallower depths the risk of groundwater contamination may be greater.  

                                                            

93 Broderick J. et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts.  Tyndall Centre for 
Climate Change Research, University of Manchester p.81-86, available at: 
http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf 
94 Warner NR, Jackson RB, et al (2012). Geochemical evidence for possible natural migration of Marcellus formation brine to shallow 
aquifers in Pennsylvania. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(30): 11961–6. 
95 Warner NR, Kresse TM, et al (2013). Geochemical and isotopic variations in shallow groundwater in areas of the Fayetteville Shale 
development, north-central Arkansas. Appl Geochem 35: 207–20. 
96 US EPA (2012) Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources. Progress Report, December 
2012. Available from http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/documents/hf-report20121214.pdf  (accessed November 2014) 
97 Myers T. (2012) Potential Contaminant Pathways from Hydraulically Fractured Shale to Aquifers available at: 
http://nofracking.com/static/media/PDF/Fracking-Aquifers.pdf 
98 Davies RJ, Mathias S, Moss J, Hustoft S and Newport L (2012) Hydraulic fractures: How far can they Go? Marine and Petroleum 
Geology in press. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

49 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Within the UK, the migration of fractures such that they would cause contamination of aquifers has been 
assessed99 as being of low risk, with fracking predicted to typically occur 2km to 3km below the surface and 
the average drinking water aquifer being located roughly 300m below the surface.  By contrast “it is more 
likely that any pollution would come from drilling down through rock containing methane and where the 
cement or steel well casing failed.” This is corroborated by evaluation100 of operational impacts associated 
with Marcellus Shale drilling where it was concluded that: “Water-supply contamination from so-called stray 
gas occurs more often from failures in well design and construction, breaches in spent hydraulic-fracturing 
water-containment ponds, and spills of leftover natural gas liquids used in drilling.  Where groundwater has 
been impacted ... the issue stems not from hydraulic fracturing per se, but poorly formulated cement and 
improperly designed wells.” 
Water Consumption 
Hydraulic fracturing is a water intensive process.  Estimates of water use during hydraulic fracturing vary 
significantly and will ultimately depend on local geological characteristics.  The SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil 
and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 2013)101 assumed that between 10,000 cubic metres (m3) and 
25,000 m3 of water would be required per well during the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle.  Comparisons of water consumption between unconventional oil and gas production and 
other users have been made.  New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC in 
AEA, 2012102) for example, highlights that water requirements associated with hydraulic fracturing would be 
expected to be low (less than 0.25% of the total water resource use in New York State based on the peak 
forecast usage rate for the oil and gas industry in the state).  Moore (2012) 103, meanwhile, highlights that 
water consumption of 19,000m3 is the same amount of water needed: to water a golf course or a month; to 
run a 1GW coal fired power plant for 12 hrs; or the amount lost to leaks in the North West of England every 
hour.  Moore (2012) also notes that the rate of abstraction is important in that water is required only 
periodically as hydraulic fracturing is not a continuous process.   
Whilst the volume of water associated with the hydraulic fracturing process is relatively low, effects on water 
resource availability could be significant locally if demand were generated from multiple wells drawing from 
the same water sources.  AEA (2012) identify a number of potential effects that could occur as a result of 
water consumption associated with hydraulic fracturing activities: 

  Reduced stream flow affecting the availability of resources for downstream use, such as for 

public water supply; 

  Adverse impacts on aquatic habitats and ecosystems from affects such as degradation of water 

quality, reduced water quantity, changes to water temperature, oxygenation and flow 
characteristics, including the effects of sediment and erosion under altered responses to 
stormwater runoff; 

  Interplay with downstream dischargers, affecting their ability to discharge where limits are 
related to stream flow rate, or the overall concentration of pollutants where discharge rates 
remain unaffected; 

  Impacts on water quality, affecting the use which can be made of surface waters. 

                                                            

99 Davies R. et al (2014) Can fracking cause contamination of drinking water? Available at: 
https://www.dur.ac.uk/.../HydraulicfracturesResearchBrief.docx 
100 Considine T. et al (2012) Environmental Impacts during Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, Impacts and Remedies. Shale 
Resources and Society Institute p.8. http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-
Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf 
101 AMEC (2013) Strategic Environmental Assessment for Further Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing: Environmental Report.  Prepared on 
behalf of the Department of Energy and Climate Change which drew on the AEA 2012 report which noted that horizontal shale gas wells 
typically use 10,000 to 25,000 m3 water per well, based largely on US analysis.  The AEA 2012 report also summarised the limited 
evidence from activity in Europe, which gave a range:  9000 – 29,000 m3/well (from Cuadrilla in Holland); 1,600m3 (Halliburton at 
Lubocino-1 well in Poland); 7,000m3 – 8,000m3 (the Danish Energy Agency).  Industry estimates suggest ranges of 10,000m3 to 
20,000m3 (http://www.total.com/en/energies-savoir-faire/petrole-gaz/exploration-production/secteurs-strategiques/gaz-non-
conventionnels/focus-gaz-de-schiste/environmental-challenges ). 
102 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe: AEAT, report for the European Commission, 2012 
103 Moore, S. (2012) Gas Works? Shale gas and its policy implications, The Policy Exchange, available from 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/gas%20works%20-%20feb%2012.pdf (accessed September 2013)  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

50 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

AMEC (2013), meanwhile, identified several factors that would need to be taken into consideration in order 
to determine the significance of water consumption on water resources.  These include: 

  The timing, intensity and duration of the demand for water (i.e. any coincidence with periods of 

water stress, such as summer droughts etc); Availability of existing water resources, any 
evidence of constraints on water availability and the volume of water presently extracted by 
existing users in that area; 

  The possibility of cumulative effects occurring either as a result of multi well pads or several 

pads in one area; 

  The volume of waste water than can be recycled and used as fresh injection fluid. 

Within the UK104, operators should make available for disclosure specific information about the water to be 
used in any fracturing operation, including: 

  Location and supply source of the water to be used for the base fluid. 

  Water usage volumes. 
  Baseline water compositional analysis. 

From a UK perspective, should water be supplied from a mains supply (either nearby to the site or tankered 
from a supply nearby), it would be the responsibility of the water utility company to ensure that the extra 
demand accords with the conditions of their water resource plans and abstraction licences.  In considering 
any licensed abstraction application, the responsible statutory body would also consider the effects on flows, 
the effects on other water users, the impacts on biota, and demands during low flow periods.  Licenses 
would only be granted where such effects are acceptable to the regulator.  Taking these regulatory 
requirements in to account, the SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 
2013) concluded that the risk of significant adverse effects on water resource availability as a result of 
hydraulic fracturing would be low.   

Outside the regulatory process, effects on water resource availability may be mitigated through the recycling 
and reuse of flowback water (the fractured fluid injected into the shale rock during hydraulic fracturing which 
returns to the surface through the drilled well). Reported recycling rates in the US vary between 10% and 
77%105.  In the case of a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England, the operator 
(Cuadrilla) has indicated that the reuse of flowback water will reduce water requirements by approximately 
20%.    
Flood Risk 
Pad preparation would involve the removal of vegetation and general groundworks to a site and the laying of 
an impermeable surface to reduce the risk of contaminants leaking into soil/groundwater.  This surface would 
change the natural drainage patterns of the site and could result in the increase of flooding off site as runoff 
rates may be faster and the natural water storage the site provides would be lost.  This risk is similar to other 
large (particularly greenfield) construction sites.   
Sites located within areas of flood risk may also be susceptible to flooding.  AMEC (2013) highlighted that, 
where sites are in flood risk areas, the following risks may arise: 

  Wells may become inundated with flood water and disrupt drilling or cause damage to the 

casing; 

  Plant and equipment may be damaged; 
  Storage tanks may become damaged or suffer a loss of power and may release contaminants 

into the flood water; 
                                                            

104 UKOOG (2013), UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines Issue, 1 February 2013 
105 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe Report for European Commission DG Environment (pp 16) which noted studies 
identifying fresh water as comprising 80-90% of the water used as well as studies reporting up to 77% of wastewater generated from the 
Pennsylvania Marcellus Shale being recycled. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

51 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Hydrocarbons may be released and cause pollution or lead to explosions or fires. 

Production Development 
During production, the risk to groundwater and surface water bodies as well as flood risk would be similar to 
that at Stage 2.  However, as additional wells would be drilled/fractured the risk of inadequate well design or 
accidents occurring could be higher.  Water consumption at this stage would also be considerably higher, 
reflecting the drilling and fracturing of additional wells.   
Production/Operation/Maintenance 
Once wells are operational, the primary issue with regards to water will be the collection and disposal of 
produced water.  Produced water is water coming to the surface, under pressure, ‘produced’ from saturation 
of the host formation.  Whilst flowback water typically returns to the surface within the first few days or weeks 
following injection of fracturing fluid, produced water is generated from the rocks across the lifetime of the 
well.  Due to low permeabilities and low water content, produced water from unconventional oil and gas wells 
is typically generated in much lower volumes than flowback fluid, estimated at an average of 57m3 per year 
per well in the US.106  Pads with multiple wells would therefore have corresponding increases in produced 
water requiring treatment or disposal.  The major substances found in produced water typically include: 
hydrocarbons, sands, dissolved salts and iron, metals and Normally Occurring Radioactive Materials 
(NORMs).   The handling and management of produced water may pose a risk to surface and ground water 
contamination due to accidental spills and runoff, similar to those described in respect of the exploratory 
stage. 
During the production stage, there would be ongoing risks of surface and ground water contamination issues 
associated with well integrity.  Additionally, re-fracturing may be required in order to stimulate the flow of 
shale gas.  The risks of contamination associated with re-fracturing would be similar to those during stages 2 
and 3 although AEA (2012) note that, whilst wells would be monitored during re-fracturing, there is 
uncertainty with respect to the risks associated with re-fracturing on well integrity.  Re-fracturing would also 
result in additional water demand.   
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
The inadequate sealing of wells following production could result in subsurface pathways for contaminant 
migration leading to groundwater pollution and potentially surface water pollution.  However, AEA (2012)107 
highlight that there is normally no pathway for release of fluids used during hydraulic fracturing to other 
formations and that some of the chemicals used in fracturing fluids will be adsorbed to the rocks or 
biodegraded in situ and that for shale gas measures at significant depths, the volume of the rock between 
the producing formation and the groundwater is substantially greater than the volume of fracturing fluid used.   

3.4.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 
Table 3.5 summarises the key surface water risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures. 
 

 

                                                            

106 European Parliament (2011) Impacts of shale gas and shale oil extraction on the environment and on human health 
107 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe Report for European Commission DG Environment. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

52 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.5 

Summary of Risks to Surface Water and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

13. 

 

Construction 
activities leading 
to pollution event 

Site preparation 

Sediment, leaks and 
spills from machinery 
leading to pollution 
event contaminating 
surface water body 

14. 

 

Drilling mud 
leakage and 
spills 

Drilling 

Pollutant from muds 
including from NORM, 
hazardous substances) 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

a)  Assessments of surface hydrology and flood risk 
should be undertaken as part of the site selection 
process.  These assessments should seek to identify 
and categorise pathways, barriers and the potential 
risk of flooding to/from a site and appropriate 
mitigation. 

b)  Surface Water Management Plans should be 

prepared setting out measures for controlling runoff 
including, for example, the installation of drainage 
channels. 

c)  The well pad should be constructed from compacted 

aggregate laid on an impermeable membrane and 
geotextile layer.  Surface water runoff would be 
collected and attenuated via perimeter ditches.  
There should be no connectivity between the runoff 
ditches from the well pad and any other surface 
water features adjacent to the well pad.  Onsite 
storage facilities should also be bunded where 
appropriate. 

d)  Require good practice construction techniques to 

avoid or minimise spills 

e)  Require Emergency Response Plan to be developed 

and spill kits provided to ensure the 
prevention/containment of accidental spills; ensure 
training on use of spill kits. 

f)  Require pre-licence revocation checks to ensure 
decommissioned well poses no risk to surface or 
groundwater. 

a)  Require impervious site liner under pad with puncture 

proof underlay. 

b)  Require double skinned closed storage tanks and 

bunding. 

c)  Require tank level alarms. 
d)  Require berm around site boundary. 
e)  Ensure no connectivity between any runoff ditches 

from the well pad and any other surface water 
features adjacent to the well pad. 

f)  Require collection and control of surface runoff. 
g)  Avoid the use of persistent, bio-cumulative and toxic, 

carcinogenic and mutagenic chemicals. 

h)  Require good site security. 
i)  Characterisation of drilling muds. 
j)  Disclosure of information on drilling muds to 

competent authority. 

k)  Use of closed loop system to contain drilling mud. 
l)  Use closed tanks for mud storage. 
m)  Restrict muds to approved list with known 

properties/safety data or non-toxic drilling muds. 

n)  Require accounting / tracking of mud use. 
o)  Require good site practice to prevent leaks and 

spills. 

p)  Require Emergency Resonse Plan to be developed 

and spill kits provided to ensure the 
prevention/containment of accidental spills. 

q)  Require pollution prevention training (including use of 

spill kits).  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

53 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

15. 

 

Leakage from 
flowback storage 
(for flowback 
reuse) 

Activity 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

16. 

 

Pollution risks 
from chemical 
transportation, 
storage, mixing 
and use 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
production 

17. 

 

Spillage of 
flowback and / or 
produced water 
recovery and 
management 
including 
pipelines and 
treatment 
facilities 

18. 

 

Injection of 
pollutants into 
ground arising 
from injection 
activities 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

Accidents and spillages 
can result in 
contamination (e.g. 
through tank ruptures, 
equipment and 
impoundment failures, 
overfills, vandalism, 
accidents, fires, poor 
operational practice) 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

Spillage from tank 
ruptures, leaks from 
pipelines, equipment 
failures, overfills, poor 
operational practice and 
water transportation.  
Disposal of flowback 
and long term produced 
water.  Fluids may 
contain added 
chemicals, NORM, 
heavy metals, organic 
compounds and are 
saline 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

Fluid contaminants 
transferred to 
groundwater and then to 
surface water via 
induced fractures 
extending beyond target 
formation, through bio-
geological reactions with 
chemical additives, via 
pre-existing fractures / 
faults, via pre-existing 
man-made structures, 

Summary 

Measures 

Potential impact if leaks 
occur 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

a)  Require impervious site liner under pad with puncture 

proof underlay. 

b)  Require double skinned closed storage tanks and 

bunding. 

c)  Require tank level alarms. 
d)  Require berm around site boundary. 
e)  Ensure no connectivity between any runoff ditches 

from the well pad and any other surface water 
features adjacent to the well pad. 

f)  Require collection and control of surface runoff. 
g)  Avoid the use of persistent, bio-cumulative and toxic, 

carcinogenic and mutagenic chemicals. 

h)  Develop a list of approved chemicals for use in 

fracturing fluids or, as in the UK, a methodology to 
enable regulators to assess the hazard potential of 
any chemicals used. 

i)  Require good site security. 
j)  Require good site practice to prevention of leaks and 

spills. 

k)  Require Emergency Response Plan to be developed 

and spill kits provided to ensure the 
prevention/containment of accidental spills.  

l)  Require pollution prevention training (including use of 

spill kits).  

See measures proposed for issue 15. 

See measures proposed for issue 14 and 15. 

a)  Establish principle to maintain multiple geological 

barriers between the target formation and any 
aquifers. 

b)  Undertake desk study and document potential 

leakage pathways (e.g. other wells, faults, mines) in 
sphere of influence of drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
to inform development of conceptual hydrogeological 
model. 

c)  Require minimum distance between hydraulic 
fracture pipes and geological strata containing 

 

54 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

well casing failures 
Impacts is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

19. 

 

Improperly 
treated flowback 
or produced 
water leading to 
pollution of 
surface water 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
production 

20. 

 

Blowout event 
leading to surface 
water pollution 

Drilling, 
fracturing and 
production 

Treatment in municipal 
sewage or other 
treatment plant will 
typically not remove 
NORM , salinity and 
other potential industry-
specific contaminants 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

Individual events.  
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

aquifers (e.g. ~literature review has identified range 
from between 600m -1,000m depending on source 
and country) and the surface (e.g. any activity closer 
than the specified depth requires special permit). 

d)  Measures should be adopted to ensure well integrity 
including consultation on well design with appropriate 
regulators, bore testing, cement testing, the 
installation of a cement bond and continual pressure 
and formation pressure testing.  The results of well 
integrity testing should be independently verified. 

e)  Permits should require information relating to (inter-
alia), the relationship between the zone of  interest 
and any overlapping or adjacent aquifers, methods of 
well construction, well integrity testing, where the well 
stimulation fluid is expected to travel, details of the 
liquids to be injected, water use and disposal of 
effluents. 
A Hydraulic Fracturing Programme108 similar to that 
in operation in the UK should be prepared by the 
operator and agreed with the relevant regulator. 

f) 

g)  Where possible, non-hazardous chemicals should be 

used in fracturing fluids. 

h)  Develop a list of approved chemicals for use in 

fracturing fluids or, as in the UK, a methodology to 
enable regulators to assess the hazard potential of 
any chemicals used. 

i)  Require development of geo-referenced database of 
the zone before work commences covering geology, 
groundwater flows, pathways, microseismicity and 
subsequent updating of the model as information 
becomes available. 

j)  Require modelling of fracturing programme to predict 
extent of fracture growth based on best information. 
k)  Require monitoring and control during operations to 
ensure hydraulic fractures / pollutants do not extend 
beyond the gas-producing formations and does not 
result in seismic events. 
Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs 
and/or abandon well safely.  

l) 

a)  Treatment plant operator to accept wastes, taking 
into account treatability/loading and ability to meet 
their own discharge consent limits. 

b)  Establish treatment requirements for wastewater. 
c)  Require dedicated wastewater treatment facility. 
d)  Require duty of care / chain of custody arrangements 

for waste transfer. 

a)  Require independent inspection, testing and audit of 

well operations (during planning, drilling and 
completions, production and abandonment) prior to 
and during the execution of activities (and use 
measures to manage releases from well).   

b)  Require emergency response plan to be developed 
and put in place as part of an accident management 
plan. 

c)  Require reporting of events to competent authority. 

                                                            

108 UKOOG (2013) guidelines suggest Hydraulic Fracturing Programmes (HFP) are developed “that describes the control and mitigation 
measures for fracture containment and for any potential induced seismicity” (See Appendix B.3.10 and 
http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelinesIssue2.pdf).  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

55 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

d)  Sharing of information to ensure that all operators in 
a well field are aware of risks and can therefore plan. 
Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs 
and/or abandon well safely. 

e) 

Well pad 
removal 

21. 

 

Site 
decommissioning 
and  
abandonment  
activities leading 
to pollution event 

Improper grading may 
result in runoff and 
erosion.  Removal of 
pad, facilities and water 
impoundment leading to 
accidental discharge to 
surface waters 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

a)  Require good practice construction / deconstruction 

practices, including design for well abandonment.  

b)  Require Emergency Response Plan to be developed 

and spill kits provided to ensure the 
prevention/containment of accidental spills; ensure 
training on use of spill kits. 

c)  Require site reinstatement plan. 

Table 3.6 summarises the key ground water risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures. 

Table 3.6 

Summary of Risks to Ground Water and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

22. 

 

Pollutants 
released from the 
well – (including 
NORM, chemical 
substances and 
gas (methane) 
contained in 
muds, cements, 
fuel oils, 
formation water) 

Drilling 
Casing 
Cementing 
Well completion 
  and 
subsequently 
Hydraulic 
fracturing 
Flowback 
management 
Production 

Due to inadequate 
control and design of 
drilling, inadequate 
spacing between 
fracture zone and 
aquifers, casing quality, 
casing design and 
cementation quality 
Pathways are cross 
drilling, casing leaks, 
surface spills, pressure 
release, casing failure, 
cross-formation 
migration e.g. due to 
naturally existing faults, 
fissures or manmade 
structures such as 
mines and wells 
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

a)  Establish and implement principle to maintain 
multiple geological barriers between the target 
formation and any aquifers. 

b)  Require minimum distance between hydraulic 
fracture pipes and geological strata containing 
aquifers (e.g. ~literature review has identified range 
from between 600m -1,000m depending on source 
and country) and the surface (e.g. any activity closer 
than the specified depth requires special permit). 

c)  Permits should require information relating to (inter-
alia), the relationship between the zone of  interest 
and any overlapping or adjacent aquifers, methods of 
well construction, well integrity testing, where the well 
stimulation fluid is expected to travel, details of the 
liquids to be injected, water use and disposal of 
effluents. 

d)  Undertake desk study and document potential 

leakage pathways (e.g. other wells, faults, mines) in 
sphere of influence of drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
to inform development of conceptual hydrogeological 
model. 

e)  A Hydraulic Fracturing Programme similar to that in 

operation in the UK should be prepared by the 
operator and agreed with the relevant regulator. 

f)  Where possible, non-hazardous chemicals should be 

used in fracturing fluids. 

g)  Consideration should be given to the development of 

a list of approved chemicals for use in fracturing 
fluids or, as in the UK, a methodology to enable 
regulators to assess the hazard potential of any 
chemicals used; 

h)  Require development of a conceptual model of the 

zone before work commences covering geology, 
groundwater flows, pathways, microseismicity and 
subsequent updating of the model as information 
becomes available. 

i)  Require modelling of fracturing programme to predict 
extent of fracture growth based on best information. 
j)  Require microseismic and borehole monitoring and 

control during operations to ensure hydraulic 
fractures / pollutants do not extend beyond the gas-

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

56 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

producing formations and does not result in seismic 
events. 

k)  Measures should be adopted to ensure well integrity 
including consultation on well design with appropriate 
regulators, bore testing, cement testing, the 
installation of a cement bond and continual pressure 
and formation pressure testing.  The results of well 
integrity testing should be independently verified. 

l)  Require integrity testing at key stages in well 

development e.g. before/during/after HF, including: 

wireline logging (calliper, cement bond, 
variable density) 
pressure / hydrostatic testing) 

 
  mechanical integrity testing of equipment 

 

(MIT). 

m)  Require key elements to maintain well safety such 

as: 

 
 

 
 

blowout preventers 
pressure & temperature monitoring and 
shutdown systems 
fire and gas detection 
continuous monitoring for leaks and 
release of gas and liquids 

  modelling to aid well/HF design 
 

real-time monitoring of HF  (such as 
microseismic surveys) 

n)  Minimum casing and cementing requirements should 
be considered.  For example, surface casing should 
extend at least 30m below the deepest underground 
source of drinking water encountered while drilling 
the well.  The surface casing should be cemented 
before extending well below underground drinking 
water.  Production casing should be cemented down 
to at least 150 metres above the formation where 
hydraulic fracturing will be carried out. 
Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs 
and/or abandon well safely. 

o) 

p)  These should include details of any monitoring to be 

undertaken following well abandonment and the 
means of well plugging. 

See measures for issue 15. 

See measures for issue 15 and: 
a)  Require hydraulic fracturing specific chemical safety 
assessment addressing specific risks associated with 
unconventional gas and associated pathways for 
exposure of the environment and humans via the 
environment (including routes via underground 
pathways).  Appropriate risk management measures 
to be specified in this assessment.    

See measures for issue 22. 

23. 

 

Flowback storage 
leakage leading 
to pollution 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

24. 

 

Fracturing fluid 
chemical 
transportation, 
storage, mixing 
and use 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

25. 

 

Injection of 
pollutants into 
ground arising 
from injection 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

Potential impact if leaks 
occur 
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

Accidents and spillages 
can result in 
contamination (e.g. 
through tank ruptures, 
equipment and 
impoundment failures, 
overfills, vandalism, 
accidents, fires, poor 
operational practice) 
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

Contaminants in fluid 
transferred to aquifers 
via induced fractures 
extending beyond target 

 

57 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

activities 

26. 

 

Spillage of 
wastewater 
(flowbackand/ or 
produced water) 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
production 

formation, through bio-
geological reactions with 
chemical additives, via 
pre-existing fractures / 
faults, via pre-existing 
man-made structures, 
well casing failure.  
Between 0-75% of 
fracture fluid flows back 
to the surface in the 
short term (four weeks) 
and may remain in the 
ground or flow back to 
the surface as a 
component of produced 
water 
Impacts is pollution of 
aquifers, surface waters 
and deep groundwater 
 

Spillage from tank 
ruptures, pipelines, 
water treatment works, 
equipment failures, 
overfills, poor 
operational practice and 
water transportation.  
Disposal of flowback 
and long term produced 
water.  Fluids may 
contain added 
chemicals, NORM, 
heavy metals, organic 
compounds and are 
saline.  Produced water 
may incur a long term 
impact and is likely to 
exceed water inputs 
during fracturing 
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

27. 

 

Subsurface 
blowout event 
leading to entry 
of fluids into 
groundwater 

Drilling, 
fracturing and 
production 

Individual events.  
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters 

See measures for issue 15 and: 
a)  Characterisation (i.e. composition and volume) of 
chemicals, waste, flowback and produced water. 

b)  Restrict additives to approved list with known 

properties/safety data e.g. that have demonstrated 
safe use specific to the relevant risks of UG 
extraction. 

c)  Require records of additives, quantities used. 
d)  Disclosure of information (e.g. composition, product 
name, purpose and volume to be used) to the public 
on chemicals used for fracturing, waste and 
wastewater. 

e)  Review whether deep injection of flowback and 

produced water into designated formations would be 
a viable, credible and least environmentally 
damaging option to avoid inappropriate treatment 
and discharge to surface water and shallow (usable) 
groundwater.109 

f)  Require accounting / tracking of flowback and 

produced water, including water disposal / reuse. 

a)  Require inspections, testing and audits of well (and 

use measures to manage releases from well). 

b)  Require emergency response plan to be developed 
and put in place as part of an accident management 
plan. 

c)  Require reporting of events to competent authority. 
d)  Sharing of information to ensure t hat all operators in 
a well field are aware of risks and can therefore plan. 
Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs 
and/or abandon well safely. 

e) 

 
Table 3.7 summarises the key water resource risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  

                                                            

109 Although common practice in North America, in Europe it is not permitted to manage flowback or produced water by reinjection at the 
present time.   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

58 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.7 

Summary of Risks to Water Resource Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

a)  Careful consideration should be given during site 

selection to existing and future water resource 
availability, in liaison with water providers and 
regulators.   

b)  Operator to produce demand profile for development 

of well field, identifying intended sources of water 
and notifying the regulator and water provider. 

c)  The operator and the relevant regulator(s) should 
assess the potential impacts on existing and future 
water resources at an early stage. 

d)  Require water management plan, with water demand 

profile modified to reflect development of gas play. 
e)  Options to reduce water demand during hydraulic 

fracturing should be considered where possible.  This 
may include the treatment and re-use of flowback 
water or the adoption of waterless technologies. 

f)  Require use of lower quality water for fracturing (e.g. 

non-potable ground / surface water or rainwater 
harvesting) 

See measures for issue 28. 

28. 

 

Extraction of 
groundwater 

Fracturing 
(extraction of 
groundwater for 
fracture fluid) 

29. 

 

Extraction of 
surface water 

Fracturing 
(extraction of 
surface water 
for fracture fluid) 

Lowering water table; 
dewatering aquifers and 
change in water quality 
(e.g. chemical 
contamination from 
mineral exposure to 
aerobic environment; 
bacterial growth due to 
lower water table; 
release of biogenic 
methane into superficial 
aquifers; upwelling of 
lower quality water or 
substances into aquifer; 
subsidence and 
destabilisation of 
geology.  Potential 
cumulative effect of 
large numbers of 
operations, particularly 
in drought and dry 
periods but also in wet 
regions where there are 
stresses within existing 
water supplies due to 
substantial demands or 
limited infrastructure) 

Impacts on hydrology 
and hydrodynamics 
altering the flow regime 
and water quality.  
Potential cumulative 
effect of large numbers 
of operations, 
particularly in drought 
and dry periods but also 
in wet regions where 
there are stresses within 
existing water supplies 
due to substantial 
demands or limited 
infrastructure. 

3.5 

Air quality 

Air quality within this context concerns the levels of pollutants emitted into the air and their significance, in 
terms of the risk of adverse effects on the environment and/or human health.  The principal emissions to air 
arising from unconventional oil and gas exploration and production include carbon monoxide (CO), sulphur 
oxides (SOx), nitrogen oxides (NOx), particulate matter (PM), and carbon dioxide (CO2) from plant and 
vehicle engines; dust; and methane (CH4) and Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) releases from fracturing 
fluids and associated plant.  

3.5.1 

Effects on Air Quality 

Non-intrusive Exploration  
On site non-intrusive exploration surveys would result in emissions from vehicles and machinery, although 
this would be of minor scale and short term duration.  Should significant new road infrastructure be required 
to facilitate site access then there may be increased emissions to air.   
 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

59 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing  
There are several main sources of emissions to air during this stage, the majority of which would be similar 
to other large construction projects including conventional oil and gas exploration.  One of these is exhaust 
fumes from HGVs, which arises from the transport of materials to and from the site, especially for the 
provision of water and removal of wastewater if pipelines to a mains supply are not in place.  Dust emissions 
arise from pad preparation and construction activities such as earthworks, handling of dusty materials and 
movements over unpaved ground, in addition to the on-site handling (conveying and blending) of the sand-
based proppant.  The use of diesel generators, heavy machinery and other plant such as pumps for drilling 
and fracturing are a further source of emissions to air.   
Methane and small amounts of VOCs can be released to air from flowback fluid, if the fluid is not contained 
in an enclosed vessel.  It is preferable to capture the methane for use or export off site (green completions), 
as flaring the gas would result in the production of CO2, NOX, SO2, CO, and PM.  Flaring is more likely to 
occur during the exploratory stages, as gas collection infrastructure is less likely to be in place compared to 
the later production stages.  Fugitive emissions of methane and other pollutants such as NOx, CO and 
hydrocarbons may also occur from pumps, valves, pressure relief valves, flanges, agitators and 
compressors, as well as emissions of VOCs from oil tanks and hydrocarbon storage tanks. 

Well blowouts can result in large scale, uncontrolled releases of fluids and gases which could have 
significant adverse impacts on local air quality.  However, as highlighted in Section 3.4.1, blowouts are rare 
reflecting in particular the low permeability of shale.   
Production Development 
Activities which give rise to adverse effects on air quality at this stage would be similar to exploratory drilling 
and fracturing.  These include groundworks and dust generation; deliveries and removal of materials from 
the site; diesel-powered drilling equipment; and fracturing fluid pumps. 
Production/operation/maintenance 
There may be ongoing fugitive emissions of methane and other trace hydrocarbons via leakages from 
values, flanges and compressors during production and potentially also from the well itself.   In addition, the 
well may be re-fractured again in the future, which would result in further air emissions as per the original 
fracturing process, such as releases from vehicle and plant exhausts, methane releases, leakages and dust 
generation from the proppant. 
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
Activities which may affect local air quality would be primarily associated with the use of vehicles and 
machinery to remove plant, equipment, well pad, wastes and other materials from the site.  The plugging of 
the well would require some construction related activities but these would be of a small scale and short term 
in duration.  Movements of earth and soil during restoration may give rise to dust depending on ground 
conditions.   

3.5.2 

Key Risk and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.8 summarises the key air quality risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  
 
 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

60 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.8 

Summary of Risks to Air Quality and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

30. 

 

Emissions from 
construction 
activities and 
diesel generators 
(CO, CO2, NOx, 
SOx, 
particulates) 

Site preparation 
Drilling 
Well injection of 
hydraulic 
fracturing fluid 

Emissions of from diesel 
generators having a 
potential to give rise to 
local air quality impacts 
Potential cumulative risk 
due to effect of multiple 
well drilling pads (e.g. 
1500-3000 kW power 
requirement) 
Potential for cumulative 
risk due to effect of 
multiple fracturing 
operations (e.g. 1500-
3000 kW power 
requirement) 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

31. 

  Gases released 
from flowback 
and produced 
water (methane) 

Flowback and 
produced water 
management 

Production 

32. 

 

Fugitive 
emissions from 
valve or flange 
leakage 
(methane) 

33. 

 

Air pollutants 
released from 
well (fugitive 
and/or flared) 
(methane and 
combustion 
gases – CO, 
CO2, NOx, SOx) 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
well completion 
Testing and 
transition to 
production 
Abandonment 

Potentially cumulative 
effect due to many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years) 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

Potential cumulative 
effect due to many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years) 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

Fugitive releases from 
wells which may occur 
over a few weeks to 
months.  Risk from poor 
capping and closure. 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases. 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan including an assessment 
of potential local air quality impacts including 
implications for compliance with ambient air quality 
limit values.  

b)  Require a Dust Suppression Plan, which could 
include positioning of dusty activities away from 
receptors; erecting screens; covering exposed soil 
and dusty materials; use of water sprays or exhaust 
ventilation systems (LEV); use of wheel washers on 
vehicles and covering of dusty loads; plus regular 
dust inspections. 

c)  Air emission specifications should be considered 
during all equipment selection and procurement, 
including the use of low emission vehicles.  Where 
possible, low or ‘zero’ sulphur fuels should be used 
for plant engines.  Vehicles and machinery should 
shut down their engines when stationary or not in 
use. 

d)  Require and implement Transport Plan to reduce 

HGV traffic (for example through load sharing); 
designate parking and storage areas; and identify 
appropriate transport routes and times e.g. avoiding 
peak traffic hours to minimise congestion and idling 
emissions. 

e)  Require low emission power supply (i.e. LPG rather 

than diesel or use of grid electricity). 

f)  Require lean burn and rich burn drilling rig engines. 
g)  Require application of abatement techniques to 
minimise emissions e.g. ultra low sulphur diesel, 
diesel particulate filters. 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan. 

b)  Require reduced emission completions or green 

completions to eliminate gas venting and for 
capturing and cleaning for use of gas released from 
fracture fluid and produced water. 

c)  Require flares or incinerators to reduce emissions 
from fracturing fluid at exploration stage (where not 
connected to gas network). 

a)  Require management as part of an emissions 

reduction plan (e.g. instigate programme of audits 
and checks by operator; gas leak prevention, 
detection and repair measures to stop leakage at an 
early stage) 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan. 

b)  Require reduced emission completions or green 

completions to eliminate gas venting and for 
capturing and cleaning for use of gas released from 
fracture fluid and produced water. 

c)  Require flares or incinerators to reduce emissions 
from fracturing fluid at exploration stage (where not 
connected to gas network). 

34. 

 

Emissions from 
vehicles (CO2, 

Site preparation 
 

Emissions from vehicles 
having a potential to 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of a traffic 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

61 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

CO, NOx, SOx, 
particulates) 

Drilling 
 
Well injection of 
hydraulic 
fracturing fluid 
 
Production 

give rise to local air 
quality impacts. 
 
Related to transport of 
water and other 
hydraulic fracturing 
materials such as silica 
to site and waste water 
from site.  Potential 
cumulative effect of 
many wells over long 
time period (25 to 35  
years).   
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

management plan 

b)  Controls on phasing of vehicle activity, requirements 

for vehicles meeting certain standards, use of 
temporary surface pipes for distribution of water 
supply and collection of wastewater, select sites 
close to water sources and waste treatment / 
disposal facilities to minimise haulage requirements, 
requirement to provide wastewater treatment facility 
for given number of wells to minimise haulage 

35. 

 

Blowout event 

Drilling, 
fracturing and 
production 

Individual events 
resulting in releases to 
air 

a)  Requirements applied to well design and 

construction, testing, monitoring 

b)  Require emergency response plan to be developed 
and put in place as part of an accident management 
plan 

3.6  Climate Change 

Climate change within the context of this study is concerned with increasing the likelihood of climate change 
effects through greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with onshore oil and gas exploration and 
production activities and the ability of facilities to adapt to the effects of climate change such as the 
occurrence of more extreme weather events.  GHGs include methane, carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide, 
VOCs and fluorinated gases.  CO2 is the primary GHG associated with human activities whilst methane is 
the second most prevalent.  However, methane is more efficient at trapping radiation than CO2 and its 
comparative impact on climate change is over 20 times greater than CO2 over a 100-year period110. 

3.6.1 

Effects on Climate Change 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
GHG emissions during this stage would be low such that any effects on climate change are unlikely to be 
significant.  Notwithstanding, should significant new road infrastructure be required to facilitate site access 
then associated emissions may be more substantive 
Exploration Drilling and Hydraulic Fracturing 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions  
Sources of GHG emissions during this stage of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production 
lifecycle are similar to those associated with conventional oil and gas exploration and production activities 
and include: pad preparation and drilling; emissions of CO2 and methane associated with disturbance to 
soils; and the potential loss of soil carbon sequestration.  However, there would be additional GHG 
emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing and well completion.   

The principal source of GHG emissions from energy use would be the drilling of boreholes and hydraulic 
fracturing associated with the use of drilling equipment, pumping of fracturing fluid and the transportation and 
treatment of wastes (as well as the embodied carbon in any materials/chemicals used).  The exact volume of 
GHG emissions associated with these activities depends upon a number of factors including the length of the 
well bore, quantities of water and other chemicals required for fracturing and treatment and transportation 
requirements.  MacKay and Stone (2013) estimate that drilling and hydraulic fracturing operations during the 
                                                            

110 See http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ghgemissions/gases/ch4.html 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

62 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

pre-production phase (i.e. stages 2 and 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production 
lifecycle for the purposes of this study) would generate 711 tCO2eq per well111.  This is based on median 
values of GHG emissions taken from a range of data sources where the maximum value reported was 1,790 
tCO2eq per well.  Indirect emissions associated with the transportation of water (including wastewater 
transport and treatment) are estimated to be 21 tCO2eq per well and the embodied carbon in chemicals 300 
tCO2eq. 
Following the completion of hydraulic fracturing, a combination of fracturing fluid and water is returned to the 
surface (flowback) which includes methane (known as well completion).  Well completion is likely to be the 
main source of GHG emissions during the pre-production phase.  MacKay and Stone (2013) estimate GHG 
emissions associated with well completion to be 2,788 tCO2eq per well (during stages 2 and 3), assuming 
that 90% of methane emissions released during flowback are captured and flared.  However, estimates of 
the volume of gas released during well completion vary significantly with the method of well completion being 
a key factor in influencing levels of GHG emissions.  In this respect, gas generated during well completion 
may be flared (i.e. combusted in an open flame), cold vented or captured/recovered (known as reduced 
emissions completion (REC) or green completions).  A study by Allen et al (2013) concerning methane 
emissions at natural gas production sites in the US112 concludes that the application of current good practice 
(in separation and capture of methane from the flowback fluid, so that it can be flared, utilised or sold) is 
more successful in reducing well completion emissions than previously estimated. 
A further source of GHG emissions are unintentional gas leaks (known as fugitive emissions).  These may be 
attributed to a range of sources including leaks from valves, well heads, equipment and onsite accidents.  
The work of Jackson et al (2013), amongst others, highlights that a potential source of fugitive emissions 
could also be from gas that has escaped into aquifers as a result of poor well construction during drilling, 
production or after abandonment113.   
Climate Change Impacts 
Construction and exploration could be affected by climate change where sites are located, for example, in 
coastal areas that may be affected by coastal inundation or sea level rise or in areas of flood risk that could 
be susceptible to extreme weather conditions.  This risk is similar to other types of development.    

Given the requirement for hydraulic fracturing during this stage and associated water consumption, there is 
the potential for activities to be both affected by climate change impacts on water resource availability and/or 
to affect future water resource availability. 
Production Development 
The range and type of effects associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under Stage 2114.   
Production/Operation/Maintenance 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions  
During the production stage, there would be GHG emissions associated with power generation and onsite 
combustion plant (e.g. generators), vehicle movements and any fugitive methane releases.  However, 
emissions from these sources would be similar to those associated with conventional gas production.  Based 
on MacKay and Stone’s (2013) central estimate of well productivity (estimated total of 85 million m3 over the 

                                                            

111 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  London: DECC 

112 Allen, D.T., Torres, V.M., Thomas, J., Sullivan, D.W., Harrison, M. Hendler, A., Herndon, S.C., Kolb, C.E., Fraser, M.P., Hill, D. Lamb, 
B.K. Miskimins, J., Sawyer, R.F. and Seinfeld, J.H. (2013) Measurements of methane emissions at natural gas production sites in the 
United State.  PNAS (2013) published ahead of print September 16, 2013, doi:10.1073/pnas.1304880110.   
113 Jackson et al (2013) Increased stray gas abundance in a subset of drinking water wells near Marcellus shale gas extraction, PNAS, 
110 (28), 11250-11255. Available from http://www.pnas.org/content/110/28/11250.short (accessed November 2014)  
114 For the purposes of this study, estimates of GHG emissions (as presented in Section 3.6) cover activities under both stages 2 and 3 
and are therefore not repeated here to avoid double counting.  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

63 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

20 year lifetime of the well115), it is assumed that total GHG emissions per well would be 8,500 tCO2e during 
production.   
Re-fracturing may be required during the production stage to stimulate the flow of shale gas.  This would 
generate additional GHG emissions similar to those noted in respect of hydraulic fracturing and well 
completion during stages 2 and 3 (on a per well basis).  The removal of fluids to maintain production (liquid 
unloading) may also be required and which may be a potentially significant source of GHG emissions.   
Indirectly, the combustion of extracted hydrocarbons would generate approximately 190 gCO2e/kWh (which 
represents combustion emissions for methane).  The extent to which domestic production and consumption 
of shale gas would affect GHG emissions would vary subject to changes in prices affecting demand and 
supply relative to other sources of energy, national policy and legislation on energy and, in the long term, 
changes in investment in alternative supplies of gas and other energy sources.  There is also a need to 
consider the impact of shale gas production and consumption on global emissions.  In the US, for example, 
the switch to shale gas has increased exports of coal, increasing the carbon intensity of energy production in 
other countries.  
Climate Change Impacts 
Climate change impacts during this stage would be similar to those identified during stages 2 and 3. 
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions  
During decommissioning there would be emissions of GHGs associated with the use of machinery and plant 
as well as from construction traffic.  There would also be emissions associated with the embodied carbon in 
concrete used to plug wells and, potentially, the treatment of any waste arisings.  Emissions in this regard 
would be similar to those associated with the decommissioning of conventional oil and gas wells.   
The inadequate sealing of wells following production could result in the release of fugitive emissions.  Whilst 
there is a lack of data relating to emissions following well abandonment, a recent study of 19 abandoned 
wells in Pennsylvania by Kang (2014) 116 has identified that methane emissions from abandoned wells could 
be more substantial than previously thought, and is an area that will require further research.   
Climate Change Impacts 
Decommissioning could be affected by climate change where sites are located, for example, in coastal areas 
that may be affected by coastal inundation or sea level rise or in areas of flood risk that could be susceptible 
to extreme weather conditions.  Climate change effects such as intensified weather events therefore have 
the potential to affect activities during Stage 5, particularly given the fact that decommissioning would take 
place in the longer term (i.e. beyond the lifetime of a well) during which time the impacts of climate change 
(e.g. sea level rise) could become more pronounced.  This risk would be similar to that associated with the 
decommissioning of conventional oil and gas wells.   

3.6.2 

Key Risk and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.9 summarises the key climate change risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  
 

 

                                                            

115 20 years represents the total licence period for Petroleum Exploration and Development Licences in the UK.  It should be noted that 
a well’s lifetime may extend beyond a 20 year period (up to around 40 years). 
116 Kang, M. (2014) CO2, Methane, and Brine Leakage through Subsurface Pathways: Exploring Modelling, Measurement, and Policy 
Options.  A Dissertation Presented to the Faculty of Princeton University in Candidacy for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy.  
Recommended for Acceptance by the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering.  Note that the findings of the study are 
subject to peer review. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

64 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.9 

Summary of Climate Change Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

36. 

 

Effects from  site 
selection  

Site selection 
 

37. 

 

Emissions from 
construction 
activities and 
diesel generators 
(CO2) 

Site preparation 
Drilling 
Well injection of 
hydraulic 
fracturing fluid 

Emissions from site 
selection arising from 
disturbing/affecting 
carbon sink. 
Selection of site that 
could be affected by 
future climate change 
effects 
 

Emissions from diesel 
generators having a 
potential to give rise to 
local air quality impacts 
Potential cumulative risk 
due to effect of multiple 
well drilling pads (e.g. 
1500-3000 kW power 
requirement) 
Potential for cumulative 
risk due to effect of 
multiple fracturing 
operations (e.g. 1500-
3000 kW power 
requirement) 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

a)  Site selection should be informed by an assessment 

of flood risk to ensure that risks associated with 
climate change impacts are identified and addressed 
(e.g. through the implementation of sustainable 
drainage systems).  During the site selection 
process, careful consideration should be given by the 
operator to the avoidance of carbon sinks (e.g. 
peats).  

a)  Where possible, measures should be taken to offset 

(at least in part) GHG emissions arising from 
construction and operational activities.  These 
measures inter alia may include, for example: 
the use of construction materials with low 
 
embodied carbon; 

  measures to reduce private vehicle use for 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

workers; 
the use of low emission vehicles or HGVs 
conforming to the highest available standards 
for vehicle emissions; 
the use of low emissions equipment and 
alternative energy sources; 
use low emission power supply (i.e. LPG rather 
than diesel or use of grid electricity). 
require lean burn and rich burn drilling rig 
engines. 
development of a transport plan to reduce HGV 
traffic (for example through load sharing); 
designate parking and storage areas; and 
identify appropriate transport routes and times 
e.g. avoiding peak traffic hours to minimise 
congestion and idling emissions; 
sourcing local materials, personnel, equipment 
and waste disposal to help reduce vehicle 
movements to the site; 
connecting to water supplies and wastewater 
infrastructure to reduce requirements to tanker 
water to and from site, reducing emissions from 
vehicles;   
provision for the transportation of materials and 
construction wastes by rail where practicable; 
identifying opportunities for the on-site reuse, 
recycling and recovery of inert and non-
hazardous waste; and 
where possible, retaining equipment on-site.  
 

 
b)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan including an assessment 
of potential local air quality impacts including 
implications for compliance with ambient air quality 
limit values.  

38. 

  Gases released 
from flowback 
and produced 
water (methane) 

Flowback and 
produced water 
management 

Potentially cumulative 
effect due to many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years) 
Impact is GHG releases 

 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan based on the principle of 
as low a level as reasonably practicable (ALARP).  

b)  Require reduced emission completions or green 

completions to eliminate gas venting and for 
capturing and cleaning for use of gas released from 
fracture fluid and produced water. 

c)  Require enclosed completion systems be adopted to 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

65 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

avoid venting from lagoons or tanks. 

d)  Require flares or incinerators to reduce emissions 
from fracturing fluid at exploration stage (where not 
connected to gas network). 

e)  Require monitoring of their sites to: (1) ensure early 

warning of unexpected leakages; and (2) obtain 
emissions estimates for regulators and government.  
This may include, for example, ambient air 
monitoring, hydrostatic pressure testing of pipework 
and equipment used to transport gas, regular seismic 
monitoring and monitoring of fracture propagation. 

 

39. 

 

Fugitive 
emissions from 
valve or flange 
leakage 
(methane) 

40. 

 

Fugitive and/or 
flared methane 
releases 

41. 

 

Emissions from 
vehicles (CO2) 

Production 

Potential cumulative 
effect due to many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years) 
Impact is GHG releases 

a)  Require management as part of an emissions 

reduction plan (e.g. instigate programme of audits 
and checks by operator; gas leak prevention, 
detection and repair measures to stop leakage at an 
early stage) 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
well completion 
Testing and 
transition to 
production 
Abandonment 

Site preparation 
 
Drilling 
 
Well injection of 
hydraulic 
fracturing fluid 
 
Production 

Fugitive releases from 
well 
Release may occur over 
a few weeks to months.  
Fugitive release from 
well 
Risk from poor capping 
and closure 
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

Emissions from vehicles 
having a potential to 
give rise to local air 
quality impacts 
 
Potential cumulative 
effect of many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years).   
Impact is reduced air 
quality and GHG 
releases 

See measures for issue 38. 

a)  Require preparation and implementation of a traffic 

management plan 

b)  Controls on phasing of vehicle activity, requirements 

for vehicles meeting certain standards, use of 
temporary surface pipes for distribution of water 
supply and collection of wastewater, select sites 
close to water sources and waste treatment / 
disposal facilities to minimise haulage requirements, 
requirement to provide wastewater treatment facility 
for given number of wells to minimise haulage 

42. 

 

Fugitive 
emissions from 
abandoned wells 

Site 
abandonment 

Fugitive emissions of 
methane from poorly 
capped wells 

a)  Well design and methods of plugging should 

minimise long term fugitive emissions.  Monitoring 
should be undertaken to detect any release of 
emissions.   

3.7  Waste Arisings  

Waste management is defined as the processing, recycling or disposal of a range of waste types including 
municipal, commercial and industrial, construction, excavation and demolition and hazardous wastes.  The 
principal waste streams generated from the hydraulic fracturing process include: cement, aggregates, and 
construction waste; drilling muds and cuttings; flowback fluid and produced water; natural gas; and well 
infrastructure. Other waste that is likely to be generated on site includes: waste oils; paraffins; waxes; oil 
contaminated rags; used batteries; waste chemicals, scrap metals, used containers and contaminated 
rainwater.  Sanitary wastewater would also be generated from site facilities.  

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

66 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

3.7.1 

Effects on Waste Arising 

Non-intrusive Exploration  
The majority of activities in this stage are desk-based, and it is not expected that substantial quantities of 
waste would be generated.  Seismic surveys would also take place, some of which may require roads or 
hard surfaces to provide access; however, the majority of such surfaces would be temporary and it is  
expected that any material used could be recycled after use to reduce waste.  
Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing  
The well pad site typically comprises of an area up to 1-2 ha during this stage.  The well pad would be 
constructed from compacted aggregate laid on an impermeable membrane and geotextile layer.  Like 
conventional oil and gas projects, small amounts of waste would be generated through the preparation of the 
well pad, such as stripped vegetation.  Concrete and mixed construction waste is expected to be generated 
from the construction of site compounds, surface seismic monitoring array, well pad and associated 
infrastructure.  
The drilling of test boreholes and wells would create waste in the form of drill cuttings, spent drill muds, 
excess cement and spacer fluid.  Flowback water returning to the surface during the hydraulic fracturing 
process is a significant source of waste during this stage.  Flowback water is typically very saline and 
contains minerals dissolved from the rocks, as well as a certain amount of fracturing fluid.  NORM can also 
be present in flowback water, and may result in flowback water being designated as radioactive waste.  
Produced water is also generated from the rocks across the lifetime of the well and requires appropriate 
management and disposal.  
Flowback water requires treatment on site to enable reuse and reinjection or removal off site to an 
appropriately licensed wastewater treatment facility.  The re-use of flowback water is less likely during 
exploratory drilling than later production stages due to the infrastructure required.  Disposal at a wastewater 
treatment plant may require pre-treatment to avoid damaging the treatment plant due to the high salinity, 
pollutant content and the potential radioactivity of flowback water.   

Natural gas is released from drilling and flowback fluid, and is classed as an extractive waste.  ‘Green 
completion’, which involves the capture of methane for use or export off site, is the preferred option, however 
gases may be disposed of by flaring in the earlier exploration stages if the infrastructure for collection is not 
in place.  Venting natural gas is not permitted in the UK except for safety reasons.  Other waste that is likely 
to be generated on site includes: waste oils; paraffins; waxes; oil contaminated rags; used batteries; waste 
chemicals, scrap metals and used containers.  
Production Development 
The range and type of effects associated with production development would be similar to those identified 
under exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing.  However, there would be additional infrastructure such as 
storage tanks, road connections and on-site pipelines resulting in an increased land take.  The extension of 
the pad is not expected to result in additional waste as the soil would be collected and stored around the site 
perimeter.   
Production/operation/maintenance 
Once in production, the treatment and reuse of fracturing fluid may be a more economically viable option 
compared to the exploration stage, as would the collection of waste methane from the fracturing fluid.  Wells 
may be refractured, and for each refracturing that occurs, this would result in similar levels of flowback water 
and methane emissions being generated as for the earlier exploration stage.    
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
It is expected that a proportion of the well infrastructure could be re-used at other locations or recycled.  
Large waste streams are therefore not expected at this stage.  Soil that has been stored on site should be 
reused to restore the site to the previous land use.  

3.7.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.10 summarises the key waste risks and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

67 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.10  Summary of Waste Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

43. 

 

Construction 
activities leading 
to generation of 
waste 

Site preparation  Waste arising from site 

preparation and 
construction requiring 
offsite management 

44. 

 

Cement waste 
from the well 
casing 

Drilling 

Cement waste arising 
from cementing well 
casing 

a)  Planning resource management should be used to 

ensure that the minimum amount of waste is 
generated, for example by avoiding over-ordering 
supplies; correct storage of materials to avoid 
damage and wastage; use of suppliers that minimise 
packaging; and specification of materials, such as 
recycled or reusable materials, where possible. 

b)  Require a Site Waste Management Plan to ensure 
that all wastes produced are handled according to 
regulatory requirements and best practice. Waste 
management planning should establish a clear 
strategy for wastes that will be generated including 
options for waste elimination, reduction, recycling, 
treatment and disposal.  

c)  Ensure on-site waste management to separate waste 

streams such as timber, scrap metal and cardboard 
promotes reuse and recycling and helps reduce 
volumes of waste sent to landfill.   

d)  Materials used for the construction of access roads 

should be chosen dependant on their ability to be 
recycled into a product for which there is a viable 
market. 

e)  All soils should be handled in suitable conditions 

(e.g. dry weather) and the most appropriate method 
of soil handling should be used.  Soils should be 
stored in allocated heaps and protected from erosion, 
contamination or degradation.  Different soil types 
should be stored separately e.g. topsoil, sub-surface 
material, and the length of time soils are stored 
should be minimised where possible. 

a)  Require management of cement waste as part of 

required Waste Management Plan which will set out 
quantities arising and methods to ensure safe short- 
and long-term disposal. 

b)  Require recycling of cement where feasible.   
c)  Require residual waste to receive appropriate 

treatment and disposal. 

 

45. 

 

Drill cuttings used 
with polymer 
based water 
muds 

Drilling 

Drill cuttings arising from 
drilling well require 
appropriate treatment 
(assumed to be non-
hazardous waste 
stream) 

a)  Require management of drill cuttings as part of 

required Waste Management Plan which will set out 
quantities arising and methods to ensure safe short- 
and long-term disposal 

b)  Require treatment at a specialist facility.   
c)  Require residual waste to specialist disposal facility. 

46. 

 

Drill mud 
(assumed to be 
water based)  

Drilling 

Used drilling mud as 
waste requiring 
appropriate treatment  

a)  Require management of mud as part of required 

Waste Management Plan which will set out quantities 
and chemicals to be used and methods to encourage 
recovery and to ensure safe short- and long-term 
disposal 

b)  Restrict muds to approved list with known 

properties/safety data or non-toxic drilling muds. 
c)  Use of closed loop system to contain and store 

drilling mud. 

d)  Require accounting / tracking of mud use. 
e)  Treat drilling muds on site for reuse in order to 

reduce the total volume required.   

f)  Require all muds to be disposed through permitted 
disposal route once they can no longer be recycled 
and reused.    

g)  Return any unused drilling muds to the vendor. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

68 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

47. 

 

Flowback and 
produced water 
(including water 
containing 
NORMS) 

Hydraulic 
fracturing 

h)  Require Emergency Response Plan to be developed 

and spill kits provided to ensure the 
prevention/containment of accidental spills; ensure 
training on use of spill kits.  

 

Flowback and produced 
water treated as waste 
requiring appropriate 
treatment  

a)  Require impervious site liner under pad with puncture 

proof underlay. 

b)  Require double skinned closed storage tanks and 

bunding. 

c)  Require tank level alarms. 
d)  Require berm around site boundary. 
e)  Require management of flowback and produced 

water as part of required Waste Management Plan 
which will set out quantities and chemicals to be 
used and methods to encourage recovery and to 
ensure safe short- and long-term disposal 
Avoid the use of persistent, bio-cumulative and toxic, 
carcinogenic and mutagenic chemicals. 

f) 

g)  Develop a list of approved chemicals for use in 

fracturing fluids or, as in the UK, a methodology to 
enable regulators to assess the hazard potential of 
any chemicals used.  

h)  Require accounting and tracking of fracking 

chemicals used. 

i)  Consider options for treatment of flowback fluid on 

site so that it can be reused in the hydraulic 
fracturing process, for example through separation to 
remove sand, oil and gas, plus ultraviolet (UV) 
disinfection.  Sand separated through the treatment 
of flowback fluid can be removed from site and 
recycled into aggregates. 

j)  Undertake analysis to assess the existence and 
extent of NORM during the exploratory phase in 
order to determine the likely requirement for 
wastewater treatment. 

k)  Ensure that flowback fluid/produced water containing 

NORM is treated using an approach that ensures 
environmental protection, and is not disposed of at 
wastewater treatment works that are unable to 
process radioactive waste.  Options could include 
pre-treatment with acid-alkali to precipitate out 
NORM for disposal or treatment at a wastewater 
treatment site licensed to accept radioactive waste. 
l)  Consider the use of reverse osmosis or evaporation 
and crystallisation to reduce levels of Total Dissolved 
Solids (TDS) in wastewater, as wastewater treatment 
plants may not be designed to remove these 
substances.  Elevated TDS levels may affect the 
functioning of the wastewater plant and potentially 
contaminate any receiving waters after discharge. 
m)  Once flowback and/or produced water considered 

waste water, identify treatment plant operator to 
accept wastes, taking into account treatability/loading 
and ability to meet their own discharge consent 
limits. 
If necessary, require dedicated wastewater treatment 
facility. 

n) 

o)  Require duty of care / chain of custody arrangements 

for waste transfer. 

 

48. 

 

Rainwater 

Operation 

Rainwater collected 
onsite requiring 
treatment 

a)  Rainwater collected on the surface of the pad should 

be regularly tested to determine whether it is 
uncontaminated and can be discharged from site or 
used within the hydraulic fracturing process, or 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

69 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

whether it requires collection and removal from site 
as hazardous waste e.g. if contaminated with 
oil/chemicals. 

See measures proposed for issue 38. 

a)  Require good practice construction / deconstruction 

practices, including design for well abandonment.  

b)  Require site reinstatement plan. 

49. 

  Gases released 
from flowback 
and produced 
water (methane) 

Flowback and 
produced water 
management 

Well pad 
removal 

50. 

 

Site 
decommissioning 
and  
abandonment  
activities leading 
to pollution event 

3.8  Cultural Heritage 

Potentially cumulative 
effect due to many wells 
over long time period 
(25 to 35 years) 
Impact is GHG releases 

Waste arising from site 
preparation and 
construction requiring 
offsite management 

Cultural heritage, including architectural and archaeological heritage, is defined as below- and above-ground 
evidence of past human activity such as archaeological sites, earthworks, buildings, battlefields and historic 
landscapes. Cultural heritage assets in their widest sense may also include land, buildings and 
structures/objects that have, for example, an important cultural meaning/use, artistic significance or scientific 
value. 
The significance of cultural heritage assets ranges from very high (assets of international importance such as 
World Heritage Sites) to negligible (assets with no or very little surviving heritage interest).  Effects could be 
either direct or indirect in character. Direct effects will result from activities associated with construction of the 
well-pad, access track and seismic arrays involving removal of topsoil and excavations. Indirect effects could 
arise from changes to local patterns of drainage potentially affecting buried deposits distant from the site. 
Effects can also be temporary or permanent in nature and could range in significance from very large 
adverse (partial or total loss of a site of very high importance) to neutral (no appreciable impacts); however, 
the likelihood of any adverse effects on a known designated heritage site are considered low, as steps will 
be taken through siting to avoid any consequence for the heritage site.  

3.8.1 

Effects on Cultural Heritage 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Cultural heritage is unlikely to be affected during the non-intrusive investigation phase.   
Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
There would be the potential for the loss or damage to cultural heritage features associated with preparation 
for drilling, although site investigation should have largely anticipated these effects. The potential for effects 
would depend upon the proximity of any investigations or works to cultural heritage or archaeological sites, 
features or landscapes, and their current condition and sensitivity.  
It is important to note that the potential effects on cultural heritage assets described above would be similar 
to those associated with the construction of conventional oil and gas well pads as well as any other 
development projects. 
Production development 
There would be the potential for the loss or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes associated 
with preparation for drilling (such as through site expansion), although site investigation should have 
anticipated these effects.  
 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

70 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Subject to appropriate mitigation identified as part of Stages 1-3, no effects on above-ground cultural 
heritage or archaeological sites or features are anticipated as a result of operational activities as no further 
surface disturbance will occur.  
Decommissioning and site restoration   
No effects on cultural heritage features or landscapes are anticipated as a result of decommissioning, 
including subsurface and buried archaeological remains as these will have been identified in previous 
stages.  

3.8.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.11 summarises the risks to cultural heritage and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  

Table 3.11  Summary of Risks to Cultural Heritage and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

51. 

 

Land required for 
the well pad 

Site selection 
and preparation 
and all 
subsequent 
stages 

Site preparation 

52. 

 

Construction 
activities leading 
to effects on 
cultural heritage 
assets 

Potential cumulative 
risks of impacts on 
removal of cultural 
heritage assets or on 
setting of existing assets 
Impact arises from the 
degrading, 
fragmentation or 
destruction of cultural 
heritage 

Potential cumulative 
risks of impacts on 
removal of cultural 
heritage assets or on 
setting of existing assets 
Impact arises from the 
degrading, 
fragmentation or 
destruction of cultural 
heritage 

a)  Avoidance of sites of high cultural heritage value. 
b)  Prohibit operations within specified sites (e.g. World 
Heritage Sites or within certain distances to specified 
sites.  

c)  Restrict operations within specified sites (see above) 

and within certain distances to specified sites.  

a)  Plan for site design and layout, in liaison with local 

and national experts, and should take account of 
potentially vulnerable cultural heritage assets and 
their settings, including historic landscapes, which 
could be affected by construction and operational 
activities. 

b)  Prior to any works on site, a desk study and site 
walkover should be undertaken to determine the 
historic and archaeological value of the sites and 
potential need for further site evaluation through trial 
trenching or more specific geophysical surveys; 

c)  Where buried heritage assets known or anticipated, 

close monitoring during topsoil stripping and 
excavation works should be undertaken to identify 
unexpected features or artefacts. This can involve 
mapping and recording of features which could 
require further investigation. 

d)  Where potential impacts are identified the 

construction should be altered to minimise impacts, 
and if retention is not possible, consideration should 
be given to moving features or undertaking detailed 
excavation and recording. 
Identification of appropriate access routes would help 
to minimise potential negative effects on historic or 
archaeological features such as listed buildings, 
caused by transport pollution and vibration 
associated with lorry movements. 
Forward planting to screen the site could be required 
to reduce potential visual impacts on cultural heritage 
assets. 

e) 

f) 

g)  Require optimisation of well pads to minimise land 
take, i.e. the number of wells, pad density and pad 
spacing (e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New 
York State). 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

71 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

3.9 

Landscape 

Landscape is an area, as perceived by people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction of 
natural and/or human factors and applies to rural areas, suburban and urban areas. Visual effects are those 
effects that influence how people see a landscape or townscape, such as the erection of a building or 
structure. Potential impacts are likely to be principally visual (some of which will be temporary) in character, 
but can also involve effects on people’s wider perception of an area. 

3.9.1 

Effects on Landscape 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Overall, the effects on landscapes and visual amenity would be localised and of a temporary nature, 
occurring only during seismic surveys, and as such are of a minimal impact.  Notwithstanding, should new 
road infrastructure be required to facilitate site access then the potential for adverse landscape impacts may 
be increased.   
Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
Like conventional oil and gas projects, activity associated with pad preparation, road access and well 
construction would have short and medium-term impacts on visual amenity and landscapes whilst further 
visual impacts will result from the presence of well heads, drilling rigs and associated equipment, with drilling 
operations lasting from 2 – 5 months per well). The drilling rig would be in the range of 30-50m high and 
could result in locally significant effects depending on the character and sensitivity of the receiving landscape 
and the extent to which such landscape changes are visible to communities.  
Production Development 
Additional visual impacts are likely to be associated with the expansion of the well pad area, additional 
materials on site such as storage tanks, and the temporary effects associated with the laying of pipelines. 
Depending on the density of the well pads, the potential cumulative visual effects of well development are 
potentially significant, where a network of wells and associated pipelines and roadways could affect a wide 
area.  
Production/operation/maintenance 
There would be no additional effects resulting from this stage under the assumption that production, 
operation and maintenance would take place on the existing site.  
Decommissioning and site restoration 
Decommissioning of wells and removal of site equipment would involve some construction activity. The 
activity would be short-term and take place on the existing site.  

3.9.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

Table 3.12 summarises the risks to landscape and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  
 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

72 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.12  Summary of Risks to Landscape and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

53. 

 

Land required for 
the well pad 

Site selection 
and preparation 
and all 
subsequent 
stages 

Potential cumulative 
risks of impacts on 
landscape 
Impact arises from the 
changes to landscape 
and degradation of 
landscape character 

54. 

 

Plant, materials 
storage, fencing, 
buildings, waste 
water tanks, drill 
rigs, lighting 

Operations 
throughout site 
lifetime 

Potential cumulative 
affects of multiple well 
pads, particularly in non-
industrial settings.  Drill 
rigs are in place for 
approximately four 
weeks per well 

a)  Site selection to avoid visual intrusion onto sensitive 

receptors, based on an assessment of landscape 
and visual impact to judge the relationship between 
the magnitude of the effects (nature-geographical 
extent-duration) and the sensitivity (low-medium-
high) of the receptor(s). 

b)  Require compatibility with current and future potential 

land use (Natura 2000 sites, conservation sites, 
human use, industrial use, appropriate zoning). 

a)  Require best practice construction techniques such 

as minimising the vertical height of drilling equipment 
(typically 30-50m high) and site screening through 
existing features or use of planting and landscaping. 

b)  Creation of bunds to help screen operations using 

stored topsoil as well as targeted planting of 
vegetation which would contribute to long-term 
screening. 

c)  Optimise the phasing of the development of well 

pads to minimise cumulative impacts. 

d)  Restrict working hours to daylight hours and adopt 

site screening to avoid light pollution to the 
surrounding area. 

e)  Require optimisation of well pads to minimise land 
take, i.e. the number of wells, pad density and pad 
spacing (e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New 
York State).  

3.10  Human Health 

Human health includes the potential for negative effects on public health and site workers as a result of shale 
gas activities.  Particular pressures and risks relating to human health include emissions to air from vehicles 
and equipment; contamination of groundwater from fracturing activities; discharges of contaminated 
wastewater; noise; and exposure to radioactive materials. 

3.10.1 

Effects on Human Health 

Non-intrusive Exploration  
Activities at this stage are expected to be largely desk based, with minimal noise and disturbance generated 
from site seismic surveys.  As a result, no effects on health are expected. 
Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing  
Impacts on health may arise from various activities in this stage.  Pad preparation and construction can 
result in noise and dust generation.  HGV movements to transport materials and the use of diesel generators 
for site equipment and drilling processes would result in harmful emissions to air, such as particulate matter 
(PM10), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and sulphur 
dioxide (SO2).  The number of HGV movements could be more substantial if the water required for hydraulic 
fracturing and flowback is tankered to/from site.  In respect of its proposed site in Lancashire, UK, Cuadrilla 
estimate that vehicle movements would peak at 250 truck movements per day during the most intense 
periods, although this would only be sustained for short intervals.  HGV movement may generate emissions 
and dust potentially affecting those with respiratory problems as well as noise and vibrations which may 
cause stress and anxiety to residents principally alongside local transport networks.  However, the potential 
for negative health impacts would depend on numerous factors such as the proximity of HGV routes to 
residential or other sensitive areas and the existing background levels of pollution.  Drilling is an activity with 
significantly high noise levels, with continuous operations each day over a period of several weeks or 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

73 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

months.  For construction equipment used in the preparatory stages, the maximum calculated composite 
noise level at 75m is 70dBA.  For horizontal drilling, the maximum noise level is 64dBA.117  Depending on the 
distance from the noise source, any attenuation and ambient noise levels, noise at 64dBA could disturb local 
residents, particularly in sensitive areas and noise controls would be necessary.  As the oil and gas sector 
already has widely used noise controls, it is anticipated that effects can largely be avoided if the installation 
is properly designed and managed. 
The hydraulic fracturing process has the potential to contaminate public drinking water supplies through 
leakage of fracturing fluid as a result of spills and containment vessel failures, the flooding of settlement 
ponds, the migration of methane and contaminants from well integrity failure and the uncontrolled discharge 
of contaminated wastewater.  The risks of water contamination are however generally low due to the 
regulatory protection of water supplies, although accidental spillages may still occur118.  Private water 
supplies are more vulnerable to contamination as they are more localised, have limited resources, 
diminishing any benefits from dilution and shorter residence times increasing the potential for exposure.  
Within the UK, they are also subject to lesser stringent monitoring requirements.  Very low levels of 
radioactive material may also be encountered in drill cuttings and flowback fluid, or through the release of 
radon gas, which may affect how such wastes are handled and subsequently disposed of.   
As with any construction activities, there are health and safety risks for workers on site which require 
management.  Construction and preparation of the pad may also be used as a focus for anti-fracking 
sentiment and may be subject to protest action from opposition groups and local communities.  This could 
potentially increase the fear of crime, vandalism and personal injury within affected communities. 

Public perception of the impacts of hydraulic fracturing can affect mental, physical and emotional wellbeing.  
This can exacerbate or trigger health effects caused by anxiety or changes in behaviour arising from 
people’s belief about the project.   
Production Development 
Most of the activities associated with this stage are expected to be largely similar to exploration.  However, 
the scale, magnitude and duration of health impacts is expected to be greater given the need to drill, 
complete and hydraulic fracture a greater number of wells, particularly those relating to noise, emissions to 
air and water contamination. 
Production/operation/maintenance 
Health effects are expected to be limited at this stage, with minimal levels of ongoing noise and vehicle 
movements.  Health effects from air pollutants and potential effects on drinking water may arise if the well is 
refractured. 
Decommissioning and Site Restoration 
Health and safety risks associated with the decommissioning process would be similar to those encountered 
on a conventional demolition site.  The process may give rise to dust, noise and emissions which affect local 
receptors, but this is not expected to be of a significant scale. 

3.10.2 

Summary of Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 
Table 3.13 summarises the risks to human health and avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures.  
 

 

                                                            

117 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe 
118 Public Health England (2014) Review of the Potential Public Health Impacts of Exposures to Chemical and Radioactive Pollutants as 
a Result of Shale Gas Extraction 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

74 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 3.13  Summary of Risks to Human Health and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

55. 

 

Land required for 
the well pad 

Site selection 
and preparation 
and all 
subsequent 
stages 

Potential cumulative 
risks of impacts on 
human health 
Impact arises from the 
activities undertaken in 
proximity to sensitive 
receptors 

a)  Sites selected should avoid residential and other 

sensitive areas. 

b)  Require buffer zone from abstraction points and 

aquifers (e.g. in the US range from 150m to 1,200m 
for drinking water related abstraction)119 

c)  Require buffer zone from residential areas, schools 

hospitals and other sensitive areas(e.g. industry 
good practice requires1,600m distance where 
possible) 120 

d)  Require buffer zone within which detailed noise 

assessment is required (e.g. 305m proposed in New 
York State) 

e)  Require buffer zone from abandoned wells and other 

potential pathways for fluid migration (e.g. 
abandoned mines).  

56. 

 

Site construction 
activities 

Site preparation 

Potential effects from 
construction activities on 
health of local 
communities 

a)  Require comprehensive high-level assessment of 

environmental risks, including risks to human health, 
and to consult with stakeholders including local 
communities, as early as practicable in the 
development of their proposals. 

b)  Limit noise, dust and mobilisation of any 

contaminants during construction as part of 
Construction Environmental Management Plan 
(CEMP). 

c)  Set appropriate limits on maximum noise levels and 

undertake noise monitoring to demonstrate 
compliance with limits. 

d)  Require a Dust Suppression Plan, which could 
include positioning of dusty activities away from 
receptors; erecting screens; covering exposed soil 
and dusty materials; use of water sprays or exhaust 
ventilation systems (LEV); use of wheel washers on 
vehicles and covering of dusty loads; plus regular 
dust inspections. 

e)  Air emission specifications should be considered 
during all equipment selection and procurement, 
including the use of low emission vehicles.  Where 
possible, low or ‘zero’ sulphur fuels should be used 
for plant engines.  Vehicles and machinery should 
shut down their engines when stationary or not in 
use. 

f)  Require and implement Transport Plan to reduce 

HGV traffic (for example through load sharing); 
designate parking and storage areas; and identify 
appropriate transport routes and times e.g. avoiding 
peak traffic hours to minimise congestion and idling 
emissions. 

g)  Require low emission power supply (i.e. LPG rather 

than diesel or use of grid electricity). 

h)  Controls on phasing of vehicle activity, requirements 

for vehicles meeting certain standards, use of 
temporary surface pipes for distribution of water 
supply and collection of wastewater, select sites 
close to water sources and waste treatment / 

                                                            

119 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe, pp 129 

120 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe, pp 129 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

75 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

57. 

 

Diesel generators  Site preparation 

Potential for fire due to 
diesel ignition 

disposal facilities to minimise haulage requirements, 
requirement to provide wastewater treatment facility 
for given number of wells to minimise haulage 

a)  Require consideration of major hazards for all stages 

in the life cycle of the development (early design, 
through operations to  post abandonment) and 
development of HSE case or similar demonstrating  
adequacy of the design, operations and  HSE 
management (including emergency response) for 
both safety and environmental major impacts.  

b)  Require emergency response plan to be developed 

and put in place (as part of an accident management 
plan) covering: 
 

leaks from the well to groundwater or surface 
water 
releases of flammable gases from the well or 
pipelines 
fires and floods 
leaks and spillage of chemicals, flowback or 
produced water 
releases during transportation 

 

 
 

 

58. 

 

Flammable gas 
(methane) 
concentrations 
from flowback 
and /or produced 
water 

Flowback and 
produced water 
management 

Potential for fire due to 
flammable gas ignition 

See measures for issue 31 and:  
a)  Operate to industry good practices to manage gas 
safety risk (American Petroleum Institute, National 
Fire Protection Association or similar) 

b)  Require consideration of major hazards for all stages 

in the life cycle of the development (early design, 
through operations to  post abandonment) and 
development of HSE case or similar demonstrating  
adequacy of the design, operations and  HSE 
management (including emergency response) for 
both safety and environmental major impacts.  
c)  Require preparation and implementation of an 

Emissions Reduction Plan based on the principle of 
as low a level as reasonably practicable (ALARP).  

d)  Require reduced emission completions or green 

completions to eliminate gas venting and for 
capturing and cleaning for use of gas released from 
fracture fluid and produced water. 

e)  Require enclosed completion systems be adopted to 

avoid venting from lagoons or tanks. 

f)  Require monitoring of their sites to: (1) ensure early 

warning of unexpected leakages; and (2) obtain 
emissions estimates for regulators and government.  
This may include, for example, ambient air 
monitoring, hydrostatic pressure testing of pipework 
and equipment used to transport gas, regular seismic 
monitoring and monitoring of fracture propagation. 
g)  Require emergency response plan to be developed 

and put in place (as part of an accident management 
plan) covering: 
 

leaks from the well to groundwater or surface 
water 
releases of flammable gases from the well or 
pipelines 
fires and floods 
leaks and spillage of chemicals, flowback or 
produced water  
releases during transportation. 

 

 
 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

76 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

Activity 

Summary 

Measures 

Potential for fire due to 
flammable gas ignition.  
Potential impacts local 
to well pad 

59. 

 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
well completion 
Testing and 
transition to 
production 
Production 

Uncontrolled 
release of gas 
(blowout event) – 
poor  
well/casing/lining 
integrity or 
damage - due to 
design, 
maintenance, 
testing or in-situ 
damage (e.g. due 
to fracturing) 

60. 

 

Pollutants 
released from the 
well – (including 
NORM, chemical 
substances and 
gas (methane) 
contained in 
muds, cements, 
fuel oils, 
formation water) 

Drilling 
Casing 
Cementing 
Well completion 
  and 
subsequently 
Hydraulic 
fracturing 
Flowback 
management 
Production 

61. 

 

Drilling mud 
leakage and 
spills 

Drilling 

Due to inadequate 
control and design of 
drilling, inadequate 
spacing between 
fracture zone and 
aquifers, casing quality, 
casing design and 
cementation quality 
Pathways are cross 
drilling, casing leaks, 
surface spills, pressure 
release, casing failure, 
cross-formation 
migration e.g. due to 
naturally existing faults, 
fissures or manmade 
structures such as 
mines and wells 
Impact is pollution of 
aquifers and surface 
waters potentially 
affecting human health 

Pollutant from muds 
including from NORM, 
hazardous substances) 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

a)  Require integrity testing at key stages in well 

development e.g. before/during/after hydraulic 
fracturing, including: 
  wireline logging (calliper, cement bond, variable 

density) 

  pressure / hydrostatic testing) 
  mechanical integrity testing of equipment (MIT). 
b)  Require key elements to maintain well safety such 

as: 
  blowout preventers 
  pressure & temperature monitoring and shutdown 

systems 

  fire and gas detection 
  continuous monitoring for leaks and release of gas 

and liquids 

  modelling to aid well/hydraulic fracturing design 
  real-time monitoring of hydraulic fracturing (such as 

microseismic surveys) 

  casings: minimum distance the surface casing 

extends below aquifer (e.g. 30m below the deepest 
underground source of drinking water encountered 
while drilling the well, and surface casing cemented 
before reaching depth of 75m below underground 
drinking water.  Production casing cemented up to 
at least 150 metres above the formation where 
hydraulic fracturing will be carried out. 
Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs 
and/or abandon well safely. 

c) 

d)  These should include details of any monitoring to be 

undertaken following well abandonment and the 
means of well plugging. 

See measure for issue 22. 

See measures proposed for issue 14. 

62. 

 

Pollution risks 
from chemical 

Hydraulic 

Accidents and spillages 
can result in 

See measures proposed for issue 15. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

77 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Source 

transportation, 
storage, mixing 
and use 

Activity 

fracturing 

Hydraulic 
fracturing and 
production 

63. 

 

Spillage of 
flowback and / or 
produced water 
recovery and 
management 
including 
pipelines and 
treatment 
facilities 

Summary 

Measures 

See measures proposed for issue 15. 

contamination (e.g. 
through tank ruptures, 
equipment and 
impoundment failures, 
overfills, vandalism, 
accidents, fires, poor 
operational practice) 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

Spillage from tank 
ruptures, leaks from 
pipelines, equipment 
failures, overfills, poor 
operational practice and 
water transportation.  
Disposal of flowback 
and long term produced 
water.  Fluids may 
contain added 
chemicals, NORM, 
heavy metals, organic 
compounds and are 
saline 
Impact is pollution of 
surface waters 

64. 

 

Site 
decommissioning 
and  
abandonment  
activities leading 
to pollution event 

Well pad 
removal 

Risk from poor 
capping/closure or poor 
maintenance/monitoring 

See measure for issue 8. 

3.11  Collective Measures for Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation 

In undertaking the review of effects and available mitigation measures, it became apparent that there are a 
number of risks and measures that span across the topics considered.  These are summarised in Table 
3.14.  

Table 3.14  Summary of High Level Risks and Avoidance, Minimisation and Mitigation Measures 

No. 

Aspect 

Summary 

Measure 

65. 

 

Absence of buffer zones 

Buffer zones may be required 
from certain activities (e.g. water 
abstraction points, residential 
areas) to minimise / prevent 
pollution risk and nuisance (e.g. 
air quality impact, water pollution, 
noise nuisance) 

f)  Require buffer zone from abstraction points and 

aquifers (e.g. in the US range from 150m to 
1,200m for drinking water related abstraction).121 

g)  Require buffer zone from residential areas, 

schools hospitals and other sensitive areas(e.g. 
industry good practice requires1,600m distance 
where possible). 122 

h)  Require buffer zone within which detailed noise 

                                                            

121 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe, pp 129 

122 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe, pp 129 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

78 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Aspect 

Summary 

Measure 

66. 

 

Insufficient baseline setting and 
monitoring 

Establishment of environmental 
baseline conditions and 
continued monitoring of 
environmental conditions 
throughout lifecycle required 
(exploration, production and 
abandonment stages) to facilitate 
impact assessment and ongoing 
management and performance 
assessment 

assessment is required (e.g. 305m proposed in 
New York State). 

i)  Require buffer zone from abandoned wells and 
other potential pathways for fluid migration (e.g. 
abandoned mines). 

j)  Require additional containment for sites near 
surface water supply locations (e.g. 800m in 
Colorado). 

a)  Require baseline conditions to be established for

- Air 
- Surface water 
- Groundwater 
- Drinking water abstraction points 
- Land condition (soil) 
- Water resources availability 
- Traffic 
- Noise 
- Biodiversity/ecology/invasive species 
- Microseismicity including conceptual model of 
geological conditions 
- presence of methane seepages 
- Existing landuse, infrastructure, buildings 
- Existing underground wells, structures. 

b)  Require ongoing monitoring and reporting 

programme to assess performance for 
- Air 
- Surface water 
- Groundwater 
- Drinking water abstraction points 
- Land condition (soil) 
- Water resources availability 
- Traffic 
- Noise 
- Water volumes and origin 
- Chemicals and proppant nature and volumes 
- Energy source and use 
- Greenhouse gas emissions 
- Drilling mud volumes and treatment 
- Flowback water surface return rate 
- Produced water volume and treatment solution
- Biodiversity/ecology/invasive species 
- Induced seismicity from fracturing 
- Presence of methane seepages 
- Spills volume, nature, location and clean-up. 
Monitoring may be continuous or periodic as 
appropriate and necessary for the different 
parameters. 

67. 

 

Lack of data and information 
collation, research and 
knowledge base development 
leading to poor basis for 
decisions 

Information on gas plays, 
geology, best available 
techniques and impacts of 
operations will emerge as 
exploration and development 
progresses.  

a)  Establish central database and information hub 

for information on unconventional gas operations 
available from site licences and research. 

b)  Establish and coordinate research programmes 

across Brazilian states regarding the 
environmental aspects of unconventional gas. 

68. 

 

Inadequate / insufficient 
regulatory capacity 

An emerging industry with limited 
/ no experience within regulators 
to assess developments, licence 
applications, EIAs, safety cases 
etc. 

a)  Develop capacity building programme across 

Federal and Brazilian states to share knowledge 
and experience and appropriate resources for 
independent and robust regulation. 

69. 

 

Lack of clear technical 
guidance for 
permitting/licensing 

Lack of clear guidance will 
undermine consistency and 
quality of regulatory enforcement 

a)  Develop guidance covering unconventional gas 

that defines required practice. Guidance and 
clarity on safety issues e.g. stray gas also 
needed. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

79 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Aspect 

Summary 

Measure 

70. 

 

Well-by-well permitting / 
licensing inadequacy 
(cumulative impacts) 

71. 

 

Industry practice 

Well by well licensing may not 
enable cumulative effects across 
a gas field to be properly 
assessed.  Synergies and 
integrated infrastructure 
requirements of a number of 
wells from multiple operators may 
not be addressed (e.g. water 
supply, wastewater treatment, 
roads) 

Industry practices (e.g. material 
handling, wastewater 
management) can be the source 
of pollution/safety incidents and 
poor environmental/safety 
performance 

72. 

 

Major accidents 

Emergency response plans may 
be lacking 

a)  Require cumulative effects (e.g. air pollution, 

traffic impacts, water resource requirements) of 
gas play development to be assessed in 
planning and permitting taking into account other 
(non-unconventional gas) developments and 
plans. 

a) 

b) 

c) 

Industry to develop good practice/codes of 
practice to be applied as part of site licence 
requirements and facility design (e.g. well 
casing, chemical storage, operational practices). 
Industry to develop minimum standards of 
technical competence of staff (‘fit and proper 
person’). 
Industry to develop Environmental/Safety 
Management System or Risk Management 
Process. 

a)  Require consideration of major hazards for all 

stages in the life cycle of the development (early 
design, through operations to  post 
abandonment) and development of HSE case or 
similar demonstrating  adequacy of the design, 
operations and  HSE management (including 
emergency response) for both safety and 
environmental major impacts.  

b)  Require emergency response plan to be 

developed and put in place covering: 
- leaks from the well to groundwater or surface 
water 
- releases of flammable gases from the well or 
pipelines 
- fires and floods 
- leaks and spillage of chemicals, flowback or 
produced water 
- releases during transportation. 

73. 

 

Potential for unforeseen 
environmental impacts due to 
lack of characterisation of 
chemicals, wastes and 
wastewaters 

Without characterisation and 
disclosure of information, 
environmental performance can 
not be assessed, monitoring 
requirements cannot be defined, 
stakeholder confidence will be 
low and independent scrutiny not 
possible 

a)  Characterisation (i.e. composition and volume) 

of chemicals used for fracturing, waste and 
wastewaters by operator prior to treatment. 
b)  Disclosure of information (e.g. composition, 

product name, purpose and volume to be used) 
to the public on chemicals used for fracturing, 
waste and wastewater. 

74. 

 

Potential environmental 
pollution risks from chemicals 
(air, water, soil, human health) 

New chemicals or new uses for 
existing chemicals result from 
fracturing operations.  Risks to 
the environment may not be 
understood and managed if uses 
and exposure are not sufficiently 
well established within chemical 
safety assessments 

a)  Require  hydraulic  fracturing  specific  chemical 
safety  assessment  addressing  specific  risks 
associated  with  unconventional  gas  and 
associated  pathways 
the 
environment  and  humans  via  the  environment 
(including  routes  via  underground  pathways).  
Appropriate  risk  management  measures  to  be 
specified in this assessment.    

for  exposure  of 

75. 

 

Pollution arising from 
temporarily abandoned wells 

Wells may be temporarily 
abandoned between exploration, 
completion and production stages 
presenting pollution risks if not 
plugged and managed correctly 

a)  Requirements for risk assessment, well 

plugging, inspection and monitoring (e.g. for 
releases to air, well integrity, periodicity of 
inspections, wellhead monitoring every 90 days). 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

80 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

No. 

Aspect 

Summary 

Measure 

76. 

 

Pollution arising from 
permanently abandoned wells 

Risk of pollution due to 
inadequate well abandonment 
(e.g. releases to air due to 
inadequate well plugging) 

a)  Require risk assessment and well plugging (e.g. 

plug with 30m of cement every 760m and at 
least 30m cement at the surface with 30m 
cement in the horizontal section; plug at least 
30m above and 15m below each fluid bearing 
stratum; ensure a micro annulus is not formed at 
temporary plugs. 

b)  Require ownership and liability of wells to be 

transferred to a competent authority on 
surrender of the site licence. 

c)  Require abandonment survey, comprising of 

monitoring of 
- Air quality 
- Surface water 
- Groundwater 
- Drinking water abstraction points 
- Land condition (soil) 
- Biodiversity  
- Presence of methane seepages 
- Landuse, infrastructure, buildings 
- Underground wells, structures*. 
The operator is responsible for restoring the site 
to its previous state or a suitable condition for re-
use. The monitoring of the environmental 
parameters will enable the operator to 
demonstrate that restoration works have been 
completed (by comparison with baselines 
established before works began).   

c)  Require post closure well inspection by regulator 
to ensure the well has been sealed, and there is 
no risk of release of fluids or emissions. 

77. 

 

Risks related to insufficient 
financial security leading to 
inability to remediate 
environmental damage 

Operators may have insufficient 
financial security to address 
pollution events that may require 
substantial resources to address 

a)  Require operators to demonstrate financial 

security (e.g. through the provision of 
performance bonds). 

 

78. 

 

Potential for environmental 
impacts due to inadequate 
public scrutiny 

Inadequate stakeholder 
engagement (public, regulators, 
industry, etc.) during permitting 
leads to lack of trust, 
understanding of issues and 
probity 

a)  Require public consultation and engagement by 

operators at all stages (pre-permitting, 
permitting, exploration, testing, production and 
abandonment). 

*This measure follows Recommendation 2014/70/EU on minimum principles for the exploration and production of 
hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high-volume hydraulic fracturing which sets out that “Member States should 
ensure that a survey is carried out after each installation’s closure to compare the environmental status of the installation 
site and its surrounding surface and underground area potentially affected by the activities with the status prior to the 
start of operations as defined in the baseline study”. 

3.12  Summary 

Overall, the study has identified a considerable range of potential environmental and human health impacts 
associated with unconventional gas exploration and production.   
The range and type of impacts identified are largely similar to those associated with conventional gas 
exploration and production and include impacts arising from construction and drilling activity (such as land 
take, noise, emissions to air and wastes), the accidental release of contaminants and the presence of new 
infrastructure.   

With regard to the risks arising from hydraulic fracturing alone, potential risks are likely to include: induced 
seismic events; the local sourcing of water, creating of additional demand during periods of water stress; the 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

81 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

management of chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture fluid; the generation and 
management of flowback water and fugitive greenhouse gas emissions.   
The potential magnitude and significance of these impacts could grow with the scale of unconventional oil 
and gas exploration and development activity.   
The study has identified a range of avoidance, minimisation and mitigation measures to manage and lessen 
the risks arising from the impacts that may arise from unconventional oil and gas exploration and production.   

These measures can be broadly categorised as those to be considered by regulators (e.g. in terms of 
developing a legislative/regulatory framework for exploration and production and in respect of determining 
proposals for unconventional gas exploration and production) and those that are targeted at operators (e.g. 
measures related to site selection or design at the project level).   
When considering the extent to which the proposed measures are applicable to the Brazilian context, we 
would anticipate that the potential risks from to shale gas exploration could be evaluated using a standard 
source–pathway–receptor model. This approach can be summarised as follows:  

  Identification of hazards; 

  Identification of consequences; 
  Estimation of the probability of the hazards occurring; 
  Estimation of the magnitude of the unmitigated risk; 

  Identification of risk management options; 
  Estimation of the residual risk after the use of regulatory controls. 

It is recommended that this work is undertaken by identified experts from Brazilian ministries, regulators and 
industry representatives.   

 
 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

 

82 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

83 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

4.  European Regulatory Framework for the 

Environmental Effects of Shale Gas 

4.1 

Introduction 

The following section provides a review of the regulatory framework for shale gas exploration and 
development in Europe.  It includes European Union law as well as that developed by Member States.  The 
section refers to regulations, directives and recommendations. 
A regulation is a legal act of the European Union that becomes immediately enforceable as law in all 
Member States simultaneously.   
A directive is a legal act of the European Union, which requires member states to achieve a particular result 
without dictating the means of achieving that result.  Directives normally leave Member States with a certain 
amount of leeway as to the exact rules to be adopted. Directives can be adopted by means of a variety of 
legislative procedures depending on their subject matter. 

In the case of hydraulic fracturing, the European Commission has also adopted a recommendation.  Whilst 
recommendations are without legal force they are negotiated and voted on according to the appropriate 
procedure. Recommendations differ from regulations, directives and decisions, in that they are not binding 
for Member States.  Depending on Member State responses to recommendations, they can however 
anticipate further legislation.  Given its relevance and overarching nature, the section begins with a summary 
of the recommendation and then goes onto consider the framework of other existing directives and 
regulations, whose application is less specific to unconventional oil and gas exploration and development. 

4.2 

European Community Recommendation 

The European Commission adopted Recommendation 2014/70/EU123  in January 2014.  The 
Recommendation sets out the minimum principles that may be used for Member States that are looking to 
develop the exploration and production of hydrocarbons using high-volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF)124 .  
The principles aim to ensure that activities can be carried out with appropriate and adequate safeguards for 
public and the environment, that resources are used efficiently and that the public is informed.  In addition, 
the Recommendation aims to provide a common framework for competent authorities, operators and the civil 
society to work within.  Principles are set out for the key areas of: 

  Project planning; 

  Assessment of environmental impacts and risks; 
  Well integrity; 
  Baseline measurements and monitoring; 

  Emission reduction; 
  Use of fracturing fluids; and 
  Dissemination of information. 

An overview of some of the Recommendation’s key points is provided in the following Box. 

                                                            

123 On minimum principles for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such as shales gas) using high-volume hydraulic 
fracturing (HVHF). 

124 Defined as injecting 1,000 m3 or more of water per fracturing stage or 10, 000 m3 or more of water during the entire frac-turing 
process into a well 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

84 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Box 1  Overview of the Recommendation 

In 2012 the European Parliament invited the Commission to establish a European framework to exploit shale gas in a safe way for 
the environment, especially in framing and eliminating the possible risks involved. Having examined the new possibilities offered by 
shale gas and potential challenges associated with its extraction, the Commission published on 22 January 2014 a Recommendation 
on minimum principles for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high-volume hydraulic fracturing 
(or the ‘Recommendation’), accompanied by an explanatory Communication.  
The recommendation attempts to strike a balance between three different objectives: (i) security of energy supply, (ii) sustainability 
and protection of environment and (iii) the competitiveness of European industries. In its Recommendation, the Commission relies on 
the acquis communautaire125 in the field of environmental protection, which is composed of numerous Regulations and Directives on 
the prevention of air pollution, water protection, protection of wildlife and flora, human health, treatment of wastes and protection of 
workers. Some of the Directives of this acquis allow the adoption of diverse Best Available Techniques (or 'BAT'). The 
Recommendation analyses, synthesises and clarifies a set of non-binding minimum principles for Member States wishing to exploit 
their hydrocarbon resources (the Recommendation is not limited to shale gas) through high-volume hydraulic fracturing (HVHF).  
The following provide a few examples of those set out by the Recommendation. This is a non-exhaustive list and it follows the typical 
stages of a shale gas extraction project: 

 

Site selection: The Recommendation contains five categories at this stage of the process:  
1.  Before granting licences for the exploration and/or the production of hydrocarbons which may lead to the use of 

HVHF, Member States should prepare a strategic environmental assessment (SEA).  

2.  Operators should then carry out an environmental impact assessment (EIA) on the basis of the EIA Directive.  The 

Recommendation potentially expands the scope of this Directive, as under the Directive, an assessment of the 
environmental impacts is not always required. Below a certain threshold, the Directive only requires a case-by-case 
screening procedure, the outcome of which can lead (but not always) to the obligation to carry out an EIA. ( 
3.  Operators should ensure that the geological formation of a site is suitable for the exploration or production of 

hydrocarbons using HVHF, and carry out a risk assessment.  A site should only be selected if the risk assessment 
shows that the HVHF ‘will not result in a direct discharge of pollutants into groundwater’.  

4.  The Recommendation indicates that a site should only be chosen if the risk assessment shows that the HVHF ‘will not 
result in a direct discharge of pollutants into groundwater and that no damage is caused to other activities around the 
installation’.  The WFD already establishes such a prohibition of direct discharges of pollutants into groundwater, but 
the Directive also provides for exceptions to prohibition.  
 The Recommendation states that before the beginning of any hydraulic fracturing operation, ‘the operator determines 
the environmental status (baseline) of the installation site and its surrounding surface and underground area 
potentially affected by the activities’;  

5. 

  Well construction: The second phase of the project consists in the construction of wells. This phase is very sensitive due to 

the risk of unwanted leaks and water contamination that could occur. The Recommendation states in this regard that the 
facility should be constructed in a manner that ‘prevents possible surface leaks and spills to soil, water or air’.  The 
operators should also ensure well integrity through well design, construction and integrity tests. The result of integrity tests 
should be reviewed by an independent and qualified third party; 
HVHF: If the operator decides to move to the operational phase and high-volume hydraulic fracturing, the 
recommendations become more numerous. In general, operators should apply the 'Best Available Techniques' (BAT) in 
order to ‘prevent, manage and reduce the impact of exploration and production of hydrocarbons’. Operators have also 
obligations related to regular monitoring of the facility and its surroundings. For example, it is their responsibility to monitor 
the pressure in the well and its stability, the volume of water injected into the well and released from it, or air emissions. 
Operators should also develop risk management plans and, in case of loss of well integrity or if pollutants are accidentally 
discharged into groundwater, they must stop operations and urgently take any necessary remedial actions; 
Disclosure of chemicals: the Recommendation states that operators should disclose the precise chemical composition of 
the fracturing fluids. On this point, the Recommendation goes beyond what is required by the Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH) Regulation, which organises the registration process of chemicals, 
their marketing and their control. REACH establishes a requirement to disclose the composition of registered chemicals, 
but only to the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), which must keep confidential certain aspects of the composition of 
chemicals; 
End of activities: After each installation’s closure, the operator should carry out a survey to compare the environmental 
status of the installation site and its surrounding surface and underground area potentially affected by the activities with the 
status of it prior to the start of operation as defined in the baseline study. 

 

 

 

 
A list of the measures included in the Recommendation is included in Table 4.1.  These measures are split 
between regulatory and non-regulatory; however it must be noted that this is not a firm classification but 
rather an indication that some of these aspects would be best addressed through regulatory measures (e.g. 
through integration into regulation) and others would be best addressed through non-regulatory measures 
(e.g. through integration into guidance). 

                                                            

125 The "acquis communautaire" covers all treaties, EU legislation, international agreements, standards, court verdicts, fundamental 
rights provisions and horizontal principles relating to environmental protection and so to shale gas. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

85 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 4.1 

Regulatory and non-regulatory measures included in the Recommendation 

Reference 

Measures 

Regulatory measures 

Member State to prepare a SEA to prevent, manage and reduce the impacts on, and risks for, human 
health and the environment. 

SEA to be carried out on the basis of the requirements of Directive 2001/42/EC. 

Member States should provide minimum distances between authorised operations and residential and 
water-protection areas. 

Member States should provide minimum depth limitations between the area to be fractured and 
groundwater. 

Member States should take the necessary measures to ensure that an EIA is carried out on the basis 
of the requirements of Directive 2001/42/EC. 

Member State should provide opportunities for public to participate in SEA procedure (note that this is 
also a requirement of the SEA Directive). 

Member State should provide opportunities for public to participate in EIA procedure (note that this is 
also a requirement of the EIA Directive). 

Member State should ensure that operators carry out a characterisation and risk assessment of the 
potential site and surrounding surface and underground area. The risk assessment should assess the 
risk of leakage or migration of drilling fluids, hydraulic fracturing fluids, naturally occurring material, 
hydrocarbons and gases from the well or target formation as well as of induced seismicity 

The risk assessment should respect a minimum vertical separation distance between the zone to be 
fractured and groundwater. 

A site should only be selected if the risk assessment shows that HVHF will not result in a direct 
discharge of pollutants into groundwater and that no damage is caused to other activities around the 
installation. 

Before HVHF operations start Member State should ensure that the operator determines the 
environmental status (baseline) of the installation site and its surrounding surface and underground 
area potentially affected by the activities. 

Member State should ensure that operators use best available techniques. 

Member State should ensure that operators develop project-specific water management plants, 
transport management plants, capture gases for subsequent use, minimise flaring and avoid venting. 
Operators should also carry out HVHF in a controlled manner and with appropriate pressure 
management with the objective to contain fractures within the reservoir and avoid induced seismicity. 

Member State should ensure that manufacturers, importers and downstream users of chemical 
substances used in hydraulic fracturing refer to hydraulic fracturing, that using chemical substances in 
HVHF is minimised and that the ability to treat fluids that emerge at the surface after HVHF is 
considered during the selection of the chemical substances to be used. 

Member State should encourage operators to use fracturing techniques that minimise water 
consumption and waste streams and do not use hazardous chemical substances. 

Member State should ensure that the operator regularly monitors the installation and the surrounding 
surface and underground area potentially affected by the operations during the exploration and 
production phase and in particular before, during and after HVHF. 

The baseline study should be used as a reference for subsequent monitoring. 

The Member State should ensure that the operator monitors the following operational parameters such 
as the precise composition of the fracturing fluid, the volume of water used, the pressure applied, the 
fluids that emerge and air emissions. 

Member State should ensure that operators monitor the impacts of HVHF on the integrity of wells and 
other manmade structures. 

Point 3.1 

Point 3.1 

Point 3.2 

Point 3.2 

Point 3.3 

Point 3.4. 

Point 3.4. 

Point 5.1 

Point 5.3 

Point 5.4 

Point 6 

Point 9.1 

Point 9.2 

Point 10.1 

Point 10.2 

Point 11.1 

Point 11.2 

Point 11.3 

Point 11.4 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

86 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Reference 

Point 11.5 

Point 12 

Point 14 

Point 15. (a) 

Point 15. (b) 

Point 15. (c) 

Measures 

Member State should ensure that the monitoring results are reported to the competent authorities. 

Member State should apply the provisions on environmental liability to all activities taking place at an 
installation site. In addition Member State should ensure that the operator provides a financial 
guarantee or equivalent covering the permit provisions and potential liabilities for environmental 
damage prior to the stat of operations involving HVHF. 

Member State should ensure that a survey is carried out after each installation’s closure to compare 
the environmental status of the installation and its surrounding surface and underground area 
potentially affected by the activities with the status prior to the start of operations as defined in the 
baseline study. 

Member State should ensure that the operator publicly disseminate information on the chemical 
substances and volumes of water that are intended t be used and are finally used for the HVHF. 

Member State should ensure that the Competent Authorities should publish a range of information on 
their internet website. 

Member State should ensure that Competent Authorities should also inform the public of incidents and 
accidents, the results of inspections, non-compliance and sanctions. 

Non regulatory measures 

 

Point 3.2 

Point 4.(a) 

Point 5.1 

Point 5.2 

Point 5.3 

Point 6.1 

Point 6.2 

Point 7 

Point 8 

Member States to provide clear rules on possible restrictions of activities (e.g. flood-prone, seismic-
prone, protected areas). 

Member State should ensure that the permitting procedures are fully coordinated when more than one 
authority is responsible, more than one operator is involved, more than one permit is needed for a 
specific project phase and more than one permit is needed under national or European legislation. 

Member State should take the necessary measure to ensure that the geological formation of a site is 
suitable for the exploration or production of hydrocarbons using HVHF. 

Risk assessment should be based on sufficient data to make it possible to characterise the potential 
exploration and production area and identify all potential exposure pathways. 

Risk assessment should be based on best available techniques and take into account the relevant 
results of the information exchange between Member States, industries concerned and NGOs. It 
should anticipate the changing behaviour of the target formation, geological layers and existing wells or 
other manmade structures exposed to the high injection pressures used in high-volume hydraulic 
fracturing and the volumes of fluids injected. The risk assessment should be updated whenever new 
data are collected. 

Before HVHF operations start, Member States should ensure that the operator determines the 
environmental status (baseline) of the installation site and its surrounding surface and underground 
area potentially affected by the activities. 

The baseline should include:  
(a) quality and flow characteristics of surface and ground water; 
(b) water quality at drinking water abstraction points; 
(c) air quality; 
(d) soil condition; 
(e) presence of methane and other volatile organic compounds in water; 
(f) seismicity; 
(g) land use; 
(h) biodiversity; 
(i) status of infrastructure and buildings; 
(j) existing wells and abandoned structures 

Member Sate should ensure that the installation is constructed in a way that prevents possible surface 
leaks and spills to soil, water or air. 

Member State should ensure that operators apply an integrated approach to the development of a 
production area with the objective of preventing and reducing environmental and health impacts, and 
risks both for workers and the general public. Adequate infrastructure requirements for servicing the 
installations should be established before the production begins. 

Point 9.3 

Member State should promote the responsible use of water resources in HVHF. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

87 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Reference 

Point 13.1 

Point 13.2 

Measures 

Member State should ensure that the competent authorities have adequate human, technical and 
financial resources to carry out their resources. 

Member State should present conflicts of interest between regulatory function of competent authorities 
and their function relating to the economic development of the resources. 

4.2.1 

Recommendation Commitments and Review 

The Recommendation included an invitation to Member States to report annually to the Commission (with 
the first reports received by December 2014126), the measures put in place in response to the 
Recommendation.  Furthermore, the Commission is required to review the effectiveness of the 
Recommendation by August 2015.  In particular, the review should include an assessment of the 
Recommendation’s application, the progress of the information exchange on best available techniques 
(BAT), of the application of relevant BAT reference documents as well as any need for updating the 
Recommendation’s provisions.  To convey the outcomes of such review work, the Commission intends to 
develop a publicly available scoreboard of Member States’ performance. 

4.3  Relevant European Community Directives and Regulations 

Table 4.2 presents a list of European Directives and Regulations that have been reviewed as part of this 
study and reflect the most significant components of the "acquis communautaire" with regard to shale gas.  
Please note however that there are additional Directives and Regulations and these are set out in Appendix 
C. 

Table 4.2 

Summary of Relevant Directives and Regulations 

Reference 

Measures 

Strategic Environmental 
Assessment Directive 
(SEAD) 

Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the 
assessment of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment (OJ L 197, 21.7.2001, 
p. 30-37) 

Environmental Impact 
Assessment Directive 
(EIAD) 

Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the 
assessment of the effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ L 26, 
28.1.2012, p. 1–21) 

Habitats Directive (HD) 

Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna 
and flora (OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7–50) 
Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the 
conservation of wild birds (OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7–25) 

Mining Waste Directive 
(MWD) 

Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the 
management of waste from extractive industries and amending Directive 2004/35/EC (OJ L 102, 
11.4.2006, p. 15–34) 

Water Framework Directive 
(WFD) 

Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a 
framework for Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1–73) 

SEVESO II 

SEVESO III 

Council Directive 96/82/EC of 9 December 1996 on the control of major-accident hazards involving 
dangerous substances (OJ L 10, 14.1.1997, p. 13–33) 

Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the control of 
major-accident hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and subsequently repealing 
Council Directive 96/82/EC (OJ L 197, 24.7.2012, p. 1–37) 

Environmental Liability 

Directive 2004/35/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental 

                                                            

126 https://ec.europa.eu/eusurvey/publication/ShalegasRec2014 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

88 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Reference 

Directive (ELD) 

Measures 

liability with regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage (OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 
56–75) 

Groundwater Directive 
(GD) 

Council Directive 80/68/EEC of 17 December 1979 on the protection of groundwater against pollution 
caused by certain dangerous substances (OJ L 20, 26.1.1980, p. 43–48) 

Groundwater Deterioration 
Directive (GWD) 

Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the 
protection of groundwater against pollution and deterioration (OJ L 372, 27.12.2006, p. 19–31) 

Registration, Evaluation, 
Authorisation and 
Restriction of Chemicals 
Regulation (REACH) 

 

Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 
concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), 
establishing a European Chemicals Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council 
Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 
76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC (OJ L 
396, 30.12.2006, p. 1–849) 

The following is a brief summary of how these differing Directives and Regulations relate to the stages of 
shale gas development. 

4.4 

Strategic Environmental Assessment 

The SEAD is a systematic decision support process, aiming to ensure that the likely significant 
environmental effects of plans and programmes127 are identified, described and evaluated.  The SEAD 
requires the completion of a strategic environmental assessment (SEA) according to the procedure defined 
in the Directive128.  It is relevant for unconventional gas extraction as it requires a SEA for plans/programmes 
which are prepared in the fields of land use, transport, energy, waste/waste management or for the projects 
which must be assessed under the Habitats Directive (see below).  The purpose is to encourage relevant 
national/regional/local authorities to organise territorial planning in a way that integrates environmental 
considerations into the development of any plan or programme.  Generally a SEA is therefore conducted 
before129 an EIA is undertaken under the EIAD requirements.  As experience shows, the SEAD can clearly 
impact energy policy, forcing for instance an Energy Ministry to coordinate with an Environment Ministry130 .   
The SEA should seek to identify, describe and evaluate the likely significant effects on the environment of 
implementing the plan or programme and to propose measures to avoid, manage or mitigate any significant 
adverse effects and to enhance any beneficial effects.  This could include specifying areas to be excluding 
from exploration and production activities, as well as proposing specific measures to inform site selection 
and project development with minimal impact on the environment.  

With regard to onshore licensing, all 10 key SEA topics and objectives are relevant. These topics are 
presented in Table 4.3.  
 

 

                                                            

127 ‘Plans and programmes’ are defined as ‘plans and programmes including those co-financed by the European Community, as well as 
any modification to them: – which are subject to preparation and/or adoption by an authority at national, regional or local level or which 
are prepared by an authority for adoption, through a legislative procedure by Parliament or Government, and – which are required by 
legislative, regulatory or administrative provisions’ (Art. 2, a, SEAD).   
128 As elaborated under Articles 3 to 10 of the Directive, which require the performance of a screening, scoping, documentation of the 
state of environment, determination of the likely (non-marginal) environmental impacts, information and consulting the public, decision-
making and monitoring of the effects of plans/programmes after their implementation. 
129 Although overlaps between the EIAD and the SEAD are deemed to exist, as the EC reports it, without further analysing them, see 
EUROPEAN COMMISSION, ‘Report on the application and effectiveness of the Directive on Strategic Environmental Assessment’, 
Brussels, 14 September 2009, COM(2009) 469final, p. 6. 
130 See the case-study on Slovak Energy Policy 2000 reported by A. KULSUM, S. SANCHEZ-TRIANA, ‘Strategic Environmental 
Assessment for Policies : An Instrument for Good Governance’, World Bank publication, Washington, DC, 2008, available at 
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/6461  (accessed in February 2013), pp. 18 to 20. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

89 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 4.3 

SEA Topics 

SEA Topics 

SEA Objectives 

Air  

To minimise emissions of pollutant gases and particulates and enhance air quality, helping to achieve 
the objectives of the Air Quality and Ambient Air Quality Directives and Cleaner Air for Europe 
programme 

Biodiversity, Flora and 
Fauna 

To protect and enhance biodiversity (habitats, species and ecosystems) working within environmental 
capacities and limits 

Climatic Factors 

To minimise greenhouse gas emissions as a contribution to climate change, ensure resilience to any 
consequences of climate change  

Cultural Heritage, including 
Architectural and 
Archaeological heritage 

To protect and where appropriate enhance the historic environment including cultural heritage 
resources, historic buildings and archaeological features  

Health 

Landscape 

To protect and enhance health, safety and wellbeing of workers and communities and minimise any 
health risks associated with onshore oil and gas operations 

To protect and enhance landscape and townscape quality and visual amenity 

Soil, Material Assets 

To conserve and enhance soil and geology and contribute to the sustainable use of land 

Population 

Material Assets 

Water 

To promote a strong, diverse and stable economy with opportunities for all; minimise disturbance to 
local communities and maximise positive social impacts 

To minimise waste arisings, promote reuse, recovery and recycling and minimise the impact of wastes 
on the environment and communities. To contribute to the sustainable use of natural and material 
assets 

To maximise water efficiency, protect and enhance water quality and help achieve the objectives of the 
Water Framework Directive 

To minimise the risks of coastal change and flooding to people, property and communities 

 
 
So far, two Member States have adopted legislation requiring that an SEA of their oil and gas licensing plan 
is conducted before the procedure for granting licences for the prospecting and extraction of hydrocarbons 
with or without the use of HVHF can be initiated.  These two member states are the UK and Lithuania131. The 
Netherlands are currently preparing an SEA. A review of the information available has found that the SEA is 
expected to be ready by mid-2015.132  

In addition to the development of an SEA, Point 3.2 of the Recommendation indicates that Member States 
should  provide clear rules on possible restrictions of activities, for example in natural protected areas, in 
flood prone areas or in seismic-prone areas.  The UK has recently published its invitations to operators to bid 
for oil and gas licences under its Licensing Plan. One of the plan guidelines indicates that for “National parks, 
Broads and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty, the mineral planning authorities should give great weight 
to conserving their landscape and scenic beauty”.  It continues to state that licensing in these areas should 
be refused except in exceptional circumstances and where it can be demonstrated that they are in the public 
interest.133  For these areas, a special test for the environmental impact assessment needs to be conducted 
by the mineral planning authority.  Section 50 of the recently enacted Infrastructure Act 2015 in the UK has 
inserted an amendment to the Petroleum Act 1998 regarding safeguards for onshore hydraulic fracturing.  
These include a commitment that “hydraulic fracturing will not take place within other protected areas”, which 
                                                            

131 Natural Gas Europe, Active Participation, Knowledge of Legal Procedures: Tools for Sustainable Development of Shale Investments 
in Poland, April 2014. http://www.naturalgaseurope.com/btk-legal-michal-tarka-shale-gas-law-poland-eera  
132 Shale Gas Europe, The Netherlands moving closer to lifting its moratorium, June 2014, http://shalegas-europe.eu/netherlands-
moving-closer-lifting-moratorium/ 

133 http://planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk/blog/guidance/minerals/planning-for-hydrocarbon-extraction/determining-the-planning-
application/#paragraph_223 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

90 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

will be defined in regulations issued by the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change.  It is noted 
however, that in the originally proposed amendment at the third reading of the Bill, protected areas included: 
  Special areas of conservation under the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994, 
  Special protection areas under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, 

  Sites of special scientific interest under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, and 
  National parks under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. 

Member States are encouraged to provide minimum distances between authorised operations and 
residential and water-protection areas.  Minimum depth limitations between the area to be fractured and 
groundwater should also been set. This has been done by Germany, which has recently banned the use of 
HVHF for activities less than 3,000m from the surface.  Within the UK, the recently enacted Infrastructure Act 
prohibits hydraulic fracturing from taking place in land at a depth of less than 1,000 metres. 

4.5 

Environmental Impact Assessment  

The EIAD requires134  a mandatory environmental impact assessment (EIA) for Annex I projects, notably for 
‘extraction of petroleum and natural gas for commercial purposes where the amount extracted exceeds 500 
tonnes/day in the case of petroleum and 500,000 m3 /day in the case of gas’.  EIA is not mandatory when the 
thresholds are not met, although determination is dependent on an accurate forecast of production volumes, 
which maybe challenging.135  Proposals for a revised EIAD were considered in 2012 and an amended 
directive adopted in 2014136 which left these thresholds unchanged. 

If an EIA is not required, a screening procedure is to be carried out for all activities listed in Annex II137, 
according to the criteria laid down in Annex III of the Directive.  Annex II catches unconventional gas 
extraction due to the fact that it includes ‘extractive industries’, including deep drilling, in particular 
geothermal drilling, surface industrial installations for the extraction of coal, petroleum, natural gas and ores 
as well as bituminous shale, etc.  Annex II also includes ‘chemical industry’, including storage facilities for 
chemical products.   
The status of EIA requirements for exploration and/ or extraction (i.e. whether a full EIA is required or only a 
screening) differ amongst the Member States selected.  It depends on how the EIA Directive requirements 
have been transposed and applied.  Table 4.4 summarises the status of EIA requirements specific to 
unconventional gas in selected Member States. 

Table 4.4 

EIA and screening status in selected Member States 

Member States 

EIA status with relation to unconventional hydrocarbons exploration and production 

Denmark  

Hungary 

Germany 
 

EIA compulsory for the exploration and extraction of shale gas since July 2012 

‘Unconventional hydrocarbons’ included in the legislation since 2008, applies to specific license area 
and royalty 

Proposal for mandatory EIA for deep wells involving HVHF 

                                                            

134 Article 4, (1) EIAD. 
135 Which potentially can be the case as far as unconventional gas is concerned as AEA 2012 points it out: as preliminary indications 
from exploratory drilling in Europe suggest that product rates are likely to be lower than in the US, it is unlikely that the threshold of 
500,000 m3 per day will be met in case of shale gas production at a single well.   
136 http://ec.europa.eu/environment/eia/review.htm  
137 Article 4, (2), EIAD. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

91 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 4.4 (continued) 

EIA and screening status in selected Member States 

Member States 

EIA status with relation to unconventional hydrocarbons exploration and production 

Spain 

Lithuania 

Netherlands 

Romania 

Portugal 

UK 

Sweden 

Poland 

Proposal for mandatory EIA for wells involving HVHF 

Mandatory EIA for exploration and production of unconventional hydrocarbons wells, particularly shale 
gas and oil 

The Netherlands Commission for Environmental Assessment (NCEA) recommended a mandatory EIA 
for projects including HVHF. This advice was published on 19 September 2013138. 

Legislation does not go beyond the requirements of the EIA Directive and does not include specific 
elements for unconventional gas 

Working group has been set to develop recommended practices to be followed during shale gas 
exploration and production activities 

Legislation does not go beyond the requirements of the EIA Directive and does not include specific 
elements for unconventional gas 

Before any exploration work starts, which can have a significant impact on the natural environment, 
notice of consultation shall be made to the supervisory authority (The County Administrative Board) in 
accordance with the provisions in the Environmental Code  

Project need to be classified as per its national legislation (Regulation of the Council of Ministers of 9 
November 2010 on Projects Likely to have significant impact on the Environment).  
EIA is not required if the drilling takes place at a depth of 5,000m and outside sensitive zones. 

The EIAD implies that the operator (licensee) cannot start a project without obtaining a permit.  Within the 
context of the development consent procedure, the public and the statutory environmental protection 
agencies must be given the right to express an opinion on the permit.  Those opinions, along with the EIA 
statement, should be taken into account by the competent authority when deciding whether to grant 
development consent for a shale gas exploration projects.    

The EIAD sets out the topics to be considered within each and every assessment; however, it is only through 
an initial phase of scoping that this is refined, to ensure only those topics relevant to the proposed 
development are considered.  The topics included at the outset are: 

  Population and human health; 
  Biodiversity, with particular attention to species and habitats protected under Directive 

92/43/EEC and Directive 2009/147/EC; 

  Land, soil, water, air and climate ▌; 
  Material assets, cultural heritage and the landscape; and 
  The interaction between the factors referred to in points (a) to (d). 

It should be noted that there is an overlap between these topics and those considered by the SEAD and this 
reflects the natural extension of matters considered by the EIAD from those required by the SEAD; however, 
whilst there is overlap of topics, the scale and determination of what constitutes a likely significant effect will 
be markedly different. 

With the UK, the environmental regulator for England (the Environment Agency) in technical guidance on 
onshore oil and gas exploratory operations139 has outlined specific issues that should be included in an EIA 
for an onshore oil and gas exploration site and is summarised below: 
 

                                                            

138 http://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=de996fa6-8a2d-4f91-8290-10f3871a7a3d 
139 Environment Agency (2013), Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance, Consultation Draft, August 2013 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

92 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

   A description of the development including: 

  a full and detailed description of the physical characteristics and design of the whole 

development, its location and land use requirements during set up and operation; 

  the main characteristics of the proposed operation including the nature, quantities, types of 

equipment, fluids, chemicals and materials to be used in construction and operation; 

  an estimate by type and quantity of expected residues and emissions resulting from the 

operation of the proposed development; 

  a description of the management of the development to prevent soil and water contamination 
and consideration of cumulative, short-, medium- and long-term effects, both permanent and 
temporary. 

  A hydrogeological assessment of the potential impacts on groundwater and surface water, 

including the impacts on any aquifers or groundwater sensitive receptors, especially abstraction 
boreholes, using the following information: 

   the location of all surface and groundwater features in the area around the proposed 

development; 

   the local and regional geological structures likely to be affected by the operations; 
  the exact nature of any well stimulation fluids proposed; 

  the proposed design of the borehole and drilling platform to prevent spills and leaks; 
  the proposed methods of containment, treatment and disposal of any such spills and leaks; 
  the potential for the migration of well stimulation fluids into sensitive geological formations 

including those containing groundwater; 

  the methods to monitor any fluid migration and seismic activity, and the mitigation techniques 

to reduce the likelihood and magnitude of such events. 

  Identification of the waste streams likely to be generated by the project, along with the predicted 

methods of recovery, treatment and disposal, focusing on: 
  well stimulation fluid remaining underground; 

  flowback fluid; 
  radioactive scale and sediments; 
  waste gas; 

  waste drilling muds and drill cuttings. 

  The likelihood of induced seismic activity occurring, the maximum possible magnitude of such 

activity and the equipment, both onsite and offsite, at risk of damage from seismic activity. 

  The requirement for water during the operation and the percentage of water that will be re-used 

or recycled. 

  An assessment of the risk of flooding from all potential sources. 
  An assessment of the impacts on sensitive ecological receptors i.e. European and nationally 

protected or notable species and habitats such as those designated under the Biodiversity 
Action Plan. 

  An assessment of the air quality impacts arising from the set up and development of the site –

such impacts should be investigated in relation to the amenity of nearby sensitive receptors and 
should form part of a wider ecological assessment relating to any nearby designated sites. 

  An assessment of the impact of the development on emissions of greenhouse gases. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

93 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  A monitoring and site management plan. 

In one country, the UK, additional information on environmental impacts is requested as part of the 
application for an exclusive right licence140.  In addition to the analysis of the geology of the area, applicants 
are required to demonstrate awareness of environmental issues and regulatory requirements in the form of 
an ‘Environmental Awareness Statement’ including information on the applicant’s understanding of the UK’s 
onshore environmental legislation relevant to the exploration, development and production stages of the 
project and on particular sensitivities associated with operational planning (e.g. Special Areas of 
Conservation, Special Protection Areas). Further the statement should include details of the applicant’s 
pollution liability arrangements and its commitment to environmental management and details of any failure 
to comply with environmental standards or requirements within the previous five years (e.g. any civil or 
criminal action against the operator, or any convictions for breaches of environmental legislation). 

4.5.1 

Habitats Directives 

The HD (along with Directive 2009/147/EC on the conservation of wild birds (the “Wild Bird Directive)) focus 
on the protection of various types of wildlife and habitats and include measures to maintain or restore 
important natural habitats and species including through the designation of Special Areas of Conservation 
(SACs) and Special Protection Areas (SPAs).   

Among the protections accorded, certain plans or projects are required to be screened to determine whether 
they are likely to have a significant effect on a protected site.  Where such effects are considered likely, an 
appropriate assessment of the implications of the plan or project for the conservation objectives of the site 
must be carried out, before that plan or project is agreed.  If an appropriate assessment were to determine 
that harm were likely to occur, appropriate prevention or mitigation measures would need to be adopted.   

4.5.2 

Mining Waste Directive 

The MWD is an important piece of legislation for unconventional gas extraction as it provides for a 
comprehensive framework for the safe management of waste resulting from extractive activities.  It 
specifically applies to waste resulting from the prospecting, extraction, treatment and storage of mineral 
resources and the working of quarries, known as ‘extractive waste’.141   

Before a shale gas project may start, the operator must also meet the obligations under the MWD.  In 
particular, given that flowback fluid is considered as an ‘extractive waste’ and given that any area designated 
for the accumulation or deposit of extractive waste should be considered a waste facility, the operator must 
obtain a permit under that Directive which will have to be based on Best Available Techniques (BAT).  The 
Commission is currently developing a reference document (the BREF note) covering the management if 
waste from shale gas extractive activities.  Like the EIAD, the MWD requires the operator who requests 
authorisation to give information on his project and its impacts and provide the public with rights to be 
consulted and to express an opinion.  The operator also has to draw up a waste management plan and a 
major accident prevention policy if the facility is classified as ‘Category A’ according to the Directive.  Finally, 
the operator has to give a financial guarantee before the start of the operation to show that they are able to 
implement all of the obligations under the permit.         

4.5.3 

Water Framework Directive 

The operator of the shale gas proposed project may also have to obtain an authorisation under the WFD, if 
the project would require abstraction of large amounts of water from a surface or groundwater body.  
Discharge of pollutants (waste water with hazardous chemicals) into groundwater bodies is also prohibited.   

                                                            

140 The Petroleum Act 1998, which consolidated a number of earlier pieces of primary legislation, vests all rights to the petroleum   (oil 
and gas) resources of Great Britain in the Crown.  The Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, on behalf of Her Majesty, 
may grant licences over a limited area and period of time that confer exclusive rights to "search and bore for and get" petroleum. These 
licences are called Petroleum Exploration and Development Licences (PEDLs).  PEDLs are generally offered in Licensing Rounds.    
Before a licence can be awarded, the applicant must satisfy DECC of the competence of its proposed operator, and each member of the 
applicant group must satisfy DECC of its financial viability and financial capacity.  Applications which meet these requirements are then 
subject to assessment, on the basis of published criteria, of the geological understanding displayed, and the exploration effort proposed.  
Where two or more applications are for the same area, the application with the highest ranking is selected. 
141 Article 1, MWD. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

94 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

4.5.4 

SEVESO II/SEVESO III 

SEVESO II/SEVESO III142  aims to prevent major accidents involving dangerous substances, while limiting 
their consequences and ensuring high level of protection in a consistent and effective manner.   
It is the subject of some debate whether shale gas activities fall under SEVESO II due to the thresholds 
identified in the Directive.  For example, SEVESO II would be considered as applicable on this basis if 50 
tonnes or more of the dehydrated natural gas were stored on site (without the well being considered as part 
of the site) which appears unlikely since storage of gas on site is not a common procedure, and in fact takes 
place in the well itself.143    
However, if the shale gas extraction site falls under the SEVESO II Directive, the operator will have to fulfil 
several obligations before starting the project, such as informing the competent authority on the quantity of 
dangerous substances that would be stored within the establishment.  Failure to meet these requirements 
will mean that the activity could not proceed.   

4.5.5 

REACH  

REACH aims to ensure a high level of protection of human health and the environment.  To do so it 
establishes procedures for collecting and assessing information on the properties and hazards of 
substances.  It requires companies to register their substances to the European Chemicals Agency, ‘ECHA’.  
ECHA receives and evaluates registrations dossiers for their compliance while Member States Competent 
Authorities (MSCAs) evaluate selected substances to clarify any grounds for considering that a substance 
constitutes a risk for human health or for the environment.  Authorities’ and ECHA's scientific committees 
assess whether the risks of substances can be managed 144.  As fracturing fluid is partly composed of 
chemicals, REACH is a relevant piece of legislation of the EU legal framework applicable to unconventional 
gas extraction.   
REACH in principle required producers/importers to register the substances with ECHA by December 2010 if 
manufactured/imported above 1,000 tonnes per year per manufacturer/importer or with a lower tonnage for 
specific hazardous substances145 and to assess risks to health and the environment.   

Operators of unconventional gas extraction projects are most likely not those who manufacture or import the 
chemical substances used in fracturing fluid.  Rather, they would most likely be considered as a ‘downstream 
users’ of such products.  Under REACH, the main registration obligations lie upon the manufacturer/importer 
of chemicals/biocidal products.  However, if the operator identifies that the exposure scenarios provided by 
its supplier during the registration/authorisation process do not cover its specific use, in its capacity of 
downstream user, the operator is obliged to report to ECHA and to provide relevant information in 
accordance with Article 38 of REACH.  Until the consideration is met, the substances cannot be used.  

4.5.6 

ELD 

The ELD is applicable to the prevention and restoration of ‘environmental damages’, which include three 
limited types of specific natural resources, that is: damage to protected species and habitat; damage to 
water; and damage to land 146.  If shale gas project leads to significant environmental damage, the operator 
will be held liable in accordance with the ELD and will be asked to bear the remediation costs.  Article 4, (5) 
that the ELD could also potentially apply to diffuse/gradual pollution provided the causal link 147 with the 
polluter/the occupational activity covered by the Directive is established.  With respect to unconventional gas 
extraction, this causal link might be difficult to establish due to the presence of numerous operators of 

                                                            

142 The report and the map use as a basis the provisions of SEVESO III  rather than those of SEVESO II, which – although into force at 
the date of submitting the present report – will soon be repealed by SEVESO III, unless relevant (e.g. when there is a relevant difference 
between the two pieces of legislation). 
143 AEA et al (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe Report for European Commission DG Environment p. 93. 
144See: http://echa.europa.eu/web/guest/regulations/reach/understanding-reach  
145 Other substances manufactured/imported under 1,000 tonnes per year must be registered in 2013 or 2018. 
146 As further defined under Art. 2, (1), ELD. 
147 Required by Article. 3, (1),( a), ELD. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

95 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

numerous pads wells (it will be easier to identify if there is only one operator per pad or well in a 
given/specific site, but this is unlikely to occur).  

4.5.7 

GD and GWD 

The GD and GWD require Member States to ensure all measures necessary to prevent or limit inputs of 
pollutants to groundwater are included in programmes of measures.  The GD requires the 
prevention/limitation of introduction of pollutants into groundwater by way of BAT. The directive places 
obligations on Member States in relation to monitoring and measures to protect groundwater; it does not 
regulate directly potentially polluting installations. It is therefore only indirectly applicable to the impacts of 
hydraulic fracturing installations, although Article 6(3) excludes measures related to, inter alia, the 
consequences of accidents or exceptional circumstances of natural cause that could not reasonably have 
been foreseen, avoided or mitigated. GWD (Article 4.4) refers to WFD (Annex V 2.4) which requires 
operational monitoring at a frequency sufficient to detect the impacts of relevant pressures on groundwater 
bodies.  

4.6 

European Member State Regulations 

In 2011, Philippe and Partners completed a study for DG ENER (‘Final Report on Unconventional Gas in 
Europe’) on the permitting and licensing of shale gas extraction in various Member States148.  The work 
provided an overview of the respective applicable licensing and permitting regimes in four Member States 
(Poland, France, Germany and Sweden) to contribute to the assessment of the appropriateness of the EU 
regulatory framework as well as of its transposition and implementation in the Member States.  The purpose 
was to provide the Commission with some first thoughts on the applicable legal background both nationally 
and internationally. 

In July 2013, the  report ‘Regulatory provisions governing key aspects of unconventional gas extraction in 
selected Member States’ (Milieu, 1st July 2013), examined regulatory practices in eight Member States 
(Bulgaria, Denmark, Germany, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Spain and United Kingdom) 149.  Given that the 
second report is more recent, provides information on a greater number of Member States (including two 150 
from the original study), this has been used to provide an overview of the position in Europe.   
Key points are summarised as follows: 

  Permitting regime and competent authorities: None of the selected Member States have set 
in place a legislation and permitting procedure specific to unconventional gas activities. They all 
rely on the current mining and/or hydrocarbon legislation. 

  Public participation and consultation requirements and access to information: Public 

participation requirements in the selected Member States mainly derive from the transposing 
legislation of the SEAD and the EIAD: 
  In the UK for the SEAD, public consultation can take place at scoping (for a minimum period 

of 5 weeks) and must take place at the Environmental Reporting stage (no minimum or 
maximum period specified; however, common practice ranges from 6 weeks to 3 months).  
The responsible authority must notify the statutory environmental consultees and provide a 
hard copy of the Environmental Report (and the plan or programme to which it relates) 
available in its offices for review.  The extent to which further engagement is undertaken is 
dependent on the responsible authority’s commitments towards consultation; however, it is 
usual practice to make the Environmental Report available on line, and to host at least one 
public meeting.   

                                                            

148 Philippe & Partners (2011), Final Report on Unconventional Gas in Europe: In the framework of the multiple framework service 
contract for legal assistance TREN/R1/350-2008 lot 1, Prepared by the law firm Philippe & Partners, Brussels, 8 November 2011 
149 Milieu (2013), Regulatory provisions governing key aspects of unconventional gas extraction in selected EU Member States 
070307/2012/630593/SER/ENV.F1 
150 Milieu (2013), Regulatory provisions governing key aspects of unconventional gas extraction in selected EU Member States 
070307/2012/630593/SER/ENV.F1 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

96 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  In the UK for the EIAD, public consultation can take place at scoping and must take place at 
the Environmental Statement stage.  The competent authority (the local planning authority) is 
required to undertake a formal period of public consultation, prior to deciding a planning 
application.  Local Authorities have discretion about how they inform communities and other 
interested parties about planning applications; however, publishing information online in an 
open data format is usual.  The time period for making comments will be set out in the 
publicity accompanying the planning application. This will be not less than 21 days, or 14 
days where a notice is published in a newspaper. 

However, in these instances, the public is only allowed to consult and comment on the resulting 
Environmental Report (for the SEAD) and the Environmental Statement (for the EIAD) and not 
on the final authorisations.  Public participation requirements are also imposed by the rules 
governing the permitting procedure under the legislation transposing the MWD.   

  Setback and zoning: In all selected Member States, setback, zoning and minimum well 
spacing requirements are derived from general mining operations and are not specific to 
unconventional hydraulic fracturing activities.  They might also arise from local planning 
permission and from the water legislation transposing EU directives regulates, controls or 
prohibits activities in specific protection zones. 

  Requirements on baseline monitoring prior to drilling or fracturing: No specific 

requirements on baseline monitoring prior to drilling or fracturing have been identified.  
Notwithstanding that existing conventional oil and gas commitments apply. 

  Gas leakage and air pollution incl. from methane (e.g. via venting, flaring): There appears 
to be no legislation in the selected Member States that explicitly addresses venting and flaring 
in the context of hydrocarbon projects. Venting and flaring of methane and other emissions are 
expected to be addressed through permitting conditions.  In some selected Member States, a 
differentiation is made between flaring and venting. As part of the consenting process in the UK, 
an applicant must demonstrate that flaring or venting will be kept to the minimum that is 
technically and economically justified. Consent to venting would not normally be given unless 
flaring is not technically possible. In Denmark, a prohibition of venting is not set in legislation but 
would be applied in practice. Flaring is only accepted to a limited extent (e.g. for safety 
reasons).  

  Well design, construction integrity and casing: There are no specific legal requirements 
relating to casing and cementing for unconventional gas wells. Notwithstanding that existing 
conventional oil and gas commitments apply. 

  Hydraulic fracturing: The study identified some of the key requirements associated to the 

carrying out of the fracturing activity: 
  Obligation on the operator to monitor the effects of fracturing operations (e.g. induced 
seismicity): None of the countries assessed have set in place measures to control and 
monitor the effects of the hydraulic fracturing process, with the exception for induced 
seismicity in the UK. 

  Injection of wastewater resulting from hydraulic fracturing for underground disposal and 

potential re-use in fracturing operations:  There was no common understanding of the 
application of the transposing provisions of the WFD leading to some Member States not 
permitting reinjection for the purposes of disposal (Romania and the UK) whilst others able 
to permit it (Germany, Denmark and Poland). 

  Treatment and discharge to surface waters: None of the selected Member States provide 

specific requirements for the treatment and discharge to surface waters of wastewater from 
unconventional gas operations. They rely on the water legislation transposing the WFD and 
UWWD. 

  Water abstraction: The general water legislation transposing EU directives on water applies, 

pursuant to which a permit would typically be required for water abstraction. None of the 
selected Member States have set specific requirements relating to the authorisation, 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

97 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

monitoring, reporting and verification of water abstraction and use during hydraulic fracturing, 
beyond these general provisions. 

  Obligation on the operator to disclose information on the chemicals contained in the 

fracturing fluids and requirements (including possible prohibition) regarding use or non-use 
of certain chemicals: In the Member States assessed, operators of unconventional gas 
activities are not explicitly obliged by national legislation to disclose information to public 
authorities and the general public on the substances they are planning to use during the 
fracturing phase.  In the UK, when assessing whether a permit will be required for 
groundwater activities, or whether any discharge to groundwater is to be prohibited, the 
authorities will require information on any chemicals contained in the fracturing fluids. 
  Permanent monitoring of the impacts of hydraulic pressure on the well or ground and 

adoption of measures (stopping or resuming activity): None of the selected Member States 
have established requirements relating to monitoring of the hydraulic pressure during 
fracturing activities, except in the UK with a traffic light system to identify unusual seismic 
activity, and Germany, with a requirement to constantly monitor the pressure in the well and 
to shut off the well where it exceeds standards. 

The report concluded that the selected Member States were relying mainly on the general mining, 
hydrocarbons and environmental legislation and related permitting procedures to regulate unconventional 
gas activities and that there were few adopted specific requirements for this type of operation.  However, the 
report noted that there were on-going reviews in a number of Member States aimed at addressing the 
specificities of unconventional gas exploration and production.   

4.6.1 

Advances in the UK 

Within the UK, the Infrastructure Act 2015151, which received Royal Assent on 12th February 2015, includes 
specific provisions regarding hydraulic fracturing.  This followed extensive debates in the House of 
Parliament152.  Under the requirements of the Act, it is now prohibited to undertake hydraulic fracturing in 
land at a depth of less than 1,000 metres.  An operator now needs to obtain a hydraulic fracturing consent 
from the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) where hydraulic fracturing is proposed at a 
depth below 1,000m.  In order to obtain the hydraulic fracturing consent, the operator needs to demonstrate 
that it has met the following conditions:  

  That the environmental impact of the development which includes the relevant well has been 

taken into account by the local planning authority. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the independent inspection of the integrity of the 

relevant well. 

  The level of methane in groundwater has, or will have, been monitored in the period of 12 

months before the associated hydraulic fracturing begins. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the monitoring of emissions of methane into the 

air. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within protected groundwater source 

areas. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within other protected areas. 
  In considering an application for the relevant planning permission, the local planning authority 
has (where material) taken into account the cumulative effects of— (a) that application, and (b) 
other applications relating to exploitation of onshore petroleum obtainable by hydraulic 
fracturing. 

                                                            

151 http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2015/7/section/50/enacted  
152 http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmhansrd/cm150126/debtext/150126-0001.htm#1501264000001  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

98 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  The substances used, or expected to be used, in associated hydraulic fracturing— (a) are 

approved, or (b) are subject to approval, by the relevant environmental regulator. 

  In considering an application for the relevant planning permission, the local planning authority 

has considered whether to impose a restoration condition in relation to that development. 

  The relevant [energy, water, wastewater] undertaker has been consulted before grant of the 

relevant planning permission. 

  The public was given notice of the application for the relevant planning permission. 

The legislation defines hydraulic fracturing as involving or expected to involve the injection of: 

(i) 

(ii) 

more than 1,000 cubic metres of fluid at each stage, or expected stage, of the hydraulic 
fracturing, or 

more than 10,000 cubic metres of fluid in total. 

Currently secondary legislation is required to be issued in the summer 2015 that clarifies the meaning of two 
of the conditions: areas which are “protected groundwater source areas”, and areas which are included 
within “other protected areas”. 

4.7  Moratoria 

Two European Member States have a ban or moratorium on hydraulic fracturing: France and Bulgaria.  In 
addition, North Rhine Westphalia in Germany and Fribourg and Vaud in Switzerland have also instituted 
moratoria.   
The Scottish Government announced a moratorium153 in February 2015 on granting consents for 
unconventional oil and gas developments for onshore Scotland whilst further research and a public 
consultation is carried out.  

4.7.1 

France 

In 2011, following strong lobbying from Europe Écologie Euro MP José Bové against shale gas exploration in 
the Larzac area of southern France, the French government suspended three gas exploration permits. A 
commission was launched charged with evaluating the environmental impact of shale gas production.  
In July 2012, following the conclusion of the commission, the French Environment Minister confirmed that the 
government would maintain a moratorium on shale gas exploration.  In September 2012, President Francois 
Hollande announced a continued ban on hydraulic fracturing in France until the end of his Presidential Term 
and called for the revocation of seven outstanding permit applications for hydraulic fracturing operations. 

Following a challenge from Schuepbach Energy LLC, a Dallas-based explorer, who argued that the law was 
unfair after having two exploration permits, France’s constitutional court upheld the ban on hydraulic 
fracturing in October 2013.  The Court ruled that the law against hydraulic fracturing was a valid means of 
protecting the environment.  The court concluded that the 2011 law “conforms to the constitution” and 
lawmakers were pursuing a legitimate goal in the general interest of protecting the environment. The court 
also rejected an argument that the ban went against property rights. 
 
 

 
 

 

                                                            

153 http://news.scotland.gov.uk/News/Moratorium-called-on-fracking-1555.aspx  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

 

99 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

4.7.2 

Bulgaria 

The Bulgarian Government has imposed a moratorium on hydraulic fracturing since January 2012 due to 
pressure from environmental groups. Since then, a parliamentary committee has been established to assess 
the moratorium.  

4.8 

Voluntary Measures 

Although to date, experience of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production is limited in Europe, 
potential best practice/voluntary actions by unconventional gas operators in Europe are beginning to 
emerge.  Two examples are found in Det Norske Veritas’ ‘Risk management of shale gas operations – 
Recommended practice’ (DNV, 2013154) and the UK Onshore Operators’ Group ‘UK Onshore Shale Gas 
Well Guidelines.  Exploration and Appraisal Stage’ (UKOOG, Issue 3 March 2015155).   
DNV’s risk management approach provides an approach to the management of environment and safety 
risks.  It stems from a traditional approach of identifying consequence categories, risk identification and 
assessment, engagement and communication of risk management with stakeholders and a management 
system to address risks.  The approach focuses on the following areas: 

  Health and safety risk management; 
  Environmental risk management; 
  Well risk management; 

  Water and energy resources risk management; 
  Infrastructure and logistics risk management; 
  Public engagement and stakeholder communication; and 

  Permitting. 

The UKOOG guidelines focus on the exploration and appraisal stage only (i.e. not extending to the 
production and closure stages at this time).  The approach of the guidelines is based on objective-setting 
rather than prescriptive requirements.  It reflects the existing UK regulatory framework and addresses the 
following: 

  Well design and construction; 

  Fracturing/flowback operations; 
  Environmental management (construction and operations); 
  Fracturing fluids and water management; 

  Minimising fugitive emissions to air; and 
  A proposed format for the public disclosure of fracture fluids. 

The UKOOG guidelines highlight the use of effective management systems to assist in discharging their 
operators and other duty holders responsibilities.  It states that “operators’ management systems should be 
developed and applied to all operations including any pre-drilling operations such as seismic acquisition 
work”.  The core principle of the management system should be a “best practice, continuous improvement, 
approach” and once implemented should, preferentially be, externally certified.  The UKOOG guidelines 
indicate that it is the intention to develop a National Standard for shale gas operations as experience is 

                                                            

154 http://www.dnv.com/industry/oil_gas/services_and_solutions/technical_advisory/process_integrity/gas_consulting/shale_gas/  

155 http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelinesIssue3.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  100 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

gained, within the framework of a Publicly Available Specification (PAS) that will be independently accredited 
by the British Standards Institute (BSI). 
Both the DNV and UKOOG approaches are voluntary.  The DNV approach stems from a classical risk 
management perspective that has been adapted and made specific to the risk aspects arising from 
unconventional gas and made available for use by the industry.  However, obtaining industry-wide 
commitment to its application is not part of the approach.   
The UKOOG guidelines stem from the industry in the UK and are a first attempt to set out and encourage the 
industry to operate to a consistent set of objectives (specific measures are not proposed) focussed on the 
early stages of development.   

In North America, where unconventional gas exploration and production is mature relative to Europe, the oil 
and gas industry has developed best practice guidance relating to unconventional gas extraction.  This forms 
part of an overall management framework for unconventional gas, particularly if regulatory frameworks do 
not address all aspects.  The International Energy Association’s (2012) ‘Golden Rules for a Golden Age of 
Gas’ publication156 defines a number of key best practice elements for unconventional gas development and 
could make a useful contribution to developing industry practice in Brazil.  The Golden Rules cover the 
following key areas for industry: 

  Measurement, disclosure and engagement; 
  Site selection; 

  Isolation of wells to prevent leaks; 
  The responsible use and management of water; 
  Elimination of venting and minimisation of flaring and other emissions; 

  The need to ‘think big’ to realise economies of scale of innovative solutions and cumulative 

effect mitigation; and 

  Ensuring a consistently high level of environmental performance. 

The Golden Rules were developed with reference to best practice for unconventional gas developed by such 
organisations as the American Petroleum Institute, the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers and 
the US Department of Energy.  As with the DNV and UKOOG guidelines, adoption of the ‘golden rules’ is 
voluntary. 

In conclusion, whilst best/recommended practice and voluntary approaches are emerging in Europe and 
becoming more developed in North America, they are not well established or fully integrated.  The industry 
across Europe may be aware of best practices but there remains no coherent industry approach or 
agreement to implement a recognised set of objectives or practices. 
Furthermore, in the absence of a developed industry in the EU and with a lack of commitment from an 
established industry to apply such measures, there is no guarantee that any voluntary approach would be 
implemented by any/many/all of the companies which in the future would become active in unconventional 
gas extraction. 

4.9 

Summary 

The European Commission adopted Recommendation 2014/70/EU provides a set of coherent minimum 
principles that may be used for Member States that are looking to develop the exploration and production of 
hydrocarbons using HVHF. The Recommendation provides a common framework for competent authorities, 
operators and the civil society to work within.  It reflects a considerable body of work, including an 
assessment of risks, Member State practice and the scope of the environmental acquis and potential policy 

                                                            

156 http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/goldenrules/weo2012_goldenrulesreport.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  101 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

options.  It is however, not a Directive and so the extent to which it will be implemented across Member 
States remains uncertain. 
The Recommendation attempts to address the gaps identified within the existing suite of Directives and 
Regulations (the acquis communautaire).  These include: 

  Insufficient requirement for site characterisation and setting of baseline conditions for air, water 

and soil; 

  Insufficient requirement for subsurface site characterisation, including baseline conditions for 

deep ground/geology/seismicity; 

  No criteria or common principles available against which to perform a geological risk 

assessment; 

  No monitoring of injection tests/‘mini-fractures’ required; 

  Requirement for cumulative effects may be inconsistently implemented (e.g. of environmental 

impacts, traffic related impacts and land take); 

  Public participation not always required as it generally occurs upon the performance of an EIA, 
which, at exploration stage, is not required if the screening procedure concludes that the project 
is not likely to have significant effect on the environment;. 

  Post closure monitoring requirements. 

At the Member State level:157 

  None of the Member States examined in this study have a regulatory regime specifically for 

unconventional gas although these are evolving; 

  There are legal uncertainties.  For example, regulation may be primarily focussed on water, 

industrial and/or mining waste law (or a combination, requiring operators to have several 
permits).  As a result requirements at national level are not only different, but sometimes 
contradictory; 

  Regulatory uncertainties and gaps are prompting Member States to review legislation and draft 
new law.  Divergence may continue and not all regulatory development at Member State level 
may deliver the necessary and required management of environmental impacts and risks, 
notably in the light of possible cross-border effects.  Also developments at Member State level 
run the risk of providing a fragmented regulatory framework across the EU which could result in 
an uneven ‘playing field’ for business and increased business costs as individual companies 
adapt to different regulatory regimes. 

Regarding best practice/voluntary actions by industry: 

  Whilst best/recommended practice and voluntary approaches are emerging, they are not well 

established or fully integrated, particularly taking into account the early stage in development of 
certain unconventional gas resources such as shale gas in Europe.  The industry across Europe 
may be aware of best practices but there remains no coherent industry approach or agreement 
to implement a recognised set of objectives or practices, although there are national positions 
e.g. UKOOG158 being established. 

  The completion of guidance by member states is still in its early stages.  However, under the 

Recommendation, the Commission is also reviewing the current reference document (BREF) on 
extractive waste under the MWD. The aim is to ensure that the BREF covers the management 
of waste from hydrocarbon exploration and production involving HVHF, in order to ensure that 
waste is appropriately handled and treated and the risk of water, air and soil pollution is 

                                                            

157 Based on the conclusions of the report ‘Regulatory provisions governing key aspects of unconventional gas extraction in selected 
Member States’ (Milieu, 1st July 2013) for the European Commission. 
158 http://www.ukoog.org.uk/onshore-extraction/industry-guidelines 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  102 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

minimised.  Such information will be publicly available and so could help inform emerging 
guidance in Brazil.  
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  103 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

5.  Brazilian Regulatory Framework for the 

Environmental Effects of Oil and Gas 

5.1 

Introduction 

This section outlines the policy and regulatory framework for oil and gas in Brazil.  It presents details in a 
chronological order, building up over time the framework of legislation relevant to the management of 
environmental effects associated with unconventional oil and gas.  Necessarily this includes considerable 
reference to the management of environmental effects associated with conventional oil and gas.  

5.2 

5.2.1 

Environmental Regulatory Requirements for the Oil and Natural Gas 
industry 
Environmental Permitting and EIA 

Law 6,938, of 1981, in its Article 10, requires the "prior environmental permitting" for the "construction, 
installation, expansion and operation of establishments and activities which make use of environmental 
resources, considered effective or potentially polluting, as well as those  tending, in any form, to cause 
environmental degradation".  
The law also established the “National System of Environment” - SISNAMA, formed by "organs and entities 
of the federal government, states, federal district, of the territories and the municipalities, as well as other 
public institutions, responsible for protecting and improving the quality of the environment". Moreover, the 
law established the National Environment Council (CONAMA), a consultative and deliberative board, with the 
following purpose, to "advise, study and propose to the Council of Government, guidelines for governmental 
policies for the environment and natural resources, and to deliberate, within the scope of its competence, on 
standards compatible with the ecologically balanced environment and essential to a healthy quality of life".  
CONAMA, following discussion with stakeholders, technical reviews and proposals from the Brazilian 
Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural Resources - Ibama (the federal environmental agency) 
will establish: 

  Standards and criteria for the effective permitting of potentially polluting activities;  
  Evaluate the possible environmental consequences of public or private projects and require the 
consideration of alternatives to such projects, where the environmental effects are significant;  
  Establish standards and criteria relating to the control and the maintenance of environmental 

quality, taking into account the safe use of environmental resources, especially water. 

The CONAMA Resolution 01/1986 defines environmental impact as "any change in the physical, chemical 
and biological properties of the environment, caused by any form of matter or energy resulting from human 
activities that, directly or indirectly, affect the health, safety and the well-being of the population; social and 
economic activities; the biota; the aesthetic conditions and health of the environment; and the quality of 
environmental resources". 
Further, it specifies that, among other activities, the deployment of oil and gas pipelines and the extraction of 
oil and natural gas will depend on development of an environmental impact assessment - EIA and its 
environmental impact report - RIMA, to be submitted for approval to the competent environmental body.  The 
text defines a scale only in the case of transmission lines (above 230KV) and power generation (above 
10MW). 
For each case the scope of the study (EIA) may vary and will depend on a Term of Reference prepared by 
the environment agency. According to the CONAMA Resolution 1/86, the environmental impact study should 
consider at least the following technical activities:  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  104 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

b) 

c) 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

Environmental analysis of the area of influence of the project and analysis of the environmental 
resources and their interactions, considering:  
a) 

the physical environment - the subsoil, water, air and climate, highlighting the mineral resources, 
topography, soil types and aptitudes, water bodies, the hydrologic regime, ocean currents, air 
currents;  
the biological environment and natural ecosystems - the flora and fauna, highlighting the 
indicator species of environmental quality, and scientific and economic value, rare and 
endangered, as well as areas reserved to permanent preservation;  

the socioeconomic environment - the use and occupation of land, water use and the 
socioeconomics highlighting the sites and archaeological, historical and cultural monuments of 
the communities, the dependency relationships between the local society, environmental 
resources and the potential future use of these resources.  

Analysis of environmental impacts of the project and its alternatives, through identifying, predicting 
the magnitude and interpretation of the significance of the likely significant impacts, showing: the 
positive and negative impacts (beneficial and adverse), direct and indirect, immediate and medium 
and long-term, temporary and permanent; their degree of reversibility; their cumulative and 
synergistic properties; the distribution of social benefits and burdens.  
Definition of measures to mitigate negative impacts, including wastes processing strategies and their 
efficiency.  

Development of follow-up and monitoring (to both positive and negative impacts) and indicating the 
factors and parameters to be considered. 

CONAMA Resolution 23/1994 was the first standard to establish specific procedures for the environmental 
permitting of activities related to the exploration and production of oil and natural gas. The resolution defined 
different categories of environmental permit, for each phase of the exploration and production activity 
(drilling, installation and production), as well as the mandatory studies corresponding to each of them. 
CONAMA Resolution 237/1997 determines that “the environmental permit for projects and activities 
considered effectively or potentially causing significant environmental degradation will depend on prior 
environmental impact study and respective report (EIA / RIMA), … submitted to public hearings, when 
appropriate, in accordance with the regulations”. The resolution establishes, therefore, that the decision on 
the amount of impact is up to the environmental agency prior to the study development. This Resolution 
applies to any kind of activity or project and not specifically to the oil and gas sector. 

CONAMA resolution 237/1997 also defined the competences of the three levels of government (Federal, 
states and municipalities) concerning the granting of environmental permits:  

  Federal environment agency, Ibama has responsibility for "projects and activities with significant 

environmental national or regional impact159 ": located or developed jointly in Brazil and in a 
neighbouring country; in the territorial sea; on the continental shelf; in the exclusive economic 
zone; in indigenous lands or federal conservation areas; located or developed in two or more 
states; whose direct environmental impacts extends beyond the territorial limits of the country or 
of one or more states; related to radioactive material, or using nuclear energy in any of its forms 
and applications ... ; and military bases or projects.” 

  State environment agencies are responsible for permits onshore. The exception in this case 
applies to pipeline or seismic lines that span more than one state and should be evaluated by 
Ibama. 

Given that the two resolutions coexist, the federal environment agency adopted a pragmatic approach 
concerning the permitting of oil and gas activities - the resolution 23/1994 is used for the cases considered 

                                                            

159 The definition of the “significance” of the project or activity impact is up to the “competent environmental body”. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  105 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

as environmentally less impacting, and resolution 237/1997 in more complex situations requiring more 
comprehensive environmental studies.  
It is worth noting that, in accordance with the resolution, the environment agency has discretion as regards 
the definition of the significance of the environmental effects and, consequently, as to the requirements and 
constraints on the process of granting of the environmental permit. If the environment agency defines the 
impacts as significant the EIA will be mandatory and more strict measures will be demanded to issue the 
environmental permit. At this stage, a project can be declined on environmental grounds, if the effects are 
significant and cannot be controlled or mitigated.  
In the case of oil and gas activities, each stage of the exploration and production process (seismic surveys, 
drilling, extended well tests and production and transportation) is likely to require permitting. Resolution 237, 
however, admits a single environmental permit for "small projects and similar activities in the same vicinity or 
to those included in development plans previously approved by the responsible governmental body, provided 
that defined a single legal liability for the whole set of activities". As an example, Ibama has been adopting a 
regional approach to drilling activities of the Brazilian state company – Petrobras, in some offshore basins. In 
this case, a single environmental study, including modeling of oil drift, as well as monitoring programs and 
contingency plans, makes viable the permitting of a preset number of projects in the same permitting 
administrative process. The procedure is restricted, however, to the set of tasks or activities, under the "legal 
liability" of a single entrepreneur.  
Ordinance 422 was published by the Ministry of the Environment in 2011 which deals with procedures for 
the federal environmental permitting of oil and gas activities and projects offshore and in land-sea transition 
zone. The ordinance specifies types of permits, deadlines and studies required for the activities of seismic, 
drilling, extended well tests and production and transportation in offshore environment. For each activity of 
the exploration and production life cycle, the ordinance specifies studies and specific constraints in 
accordance with the environmental sensitivity of the area and depth range and/or distance from the coast.  
The regulation, sought to detail the procedures required for the permitting and, thus, to overcome possible 
ambiguities arising from the application of CONAMA Resolutions 23 and 237160 .  
It should be noted that the specific permitting for the onshore activities, including those related to the oil and 
gas industry continues to be treated on the basis of the two CONAMA Resolutions. Considering that onshore 
activities include "linear" projects, such as pipelines deployment and seismic surveys and those activities 
eventually extend over more than one state or include activities with significant environmental national or 
regional impact, they might also be a matter of competence of the federal environmental agency. 
The Complementary Law 140 was published in 2012 by the federal government aiming at a more precise 
definition of competences for the environmental permitting. The role of the federal government and states 
have not changed; however the new law eliminated the criterion concerning the "extension" of impacts as 
determinants for the definition of permitting competence. Therefore, the distinction of competences is now 
defined only upon the activity location. Thus, the responsibility of the federal agency in permitting remained 
restricted to enterprises located or developed jointly in Brazil and in a neighbouring country; in two or more 
states; in the territorial sea, the continental shelf or the exclusive economic zone; in indigenous lands; in 
federal conservation units (e.g. national parks and reserves); as well as military projects; or those involving 
radioactive material or the use of nuclear energy.  

The law no longer mentions those projects "whose direct environmental impacts extends beyond the 
territorial limits of the country or of one or more states"161. On the other hand, it opens a possibility for the 
                                                            

160 Resolution 237 applies to any activity considered effectively or potentially causing significant environmental degradation and not 
only to the oil and gas sector. The resolution is a “guide” to the environment agencies, both state and federal, in charge of evaluating 
environmental studies and issuing environmental permits. There are not requirements to be followed directly by oil and gas companies. 
The same applies to Resolution 23 and Ordinance 422. Nowadays, Ibama when considering offshore activities has to comply only with 
Ordinance 422, but as stated before, for the onshore basins Resolution 23 is still in force. Just to give a broader idea of the Brazilian 
environmental regulation, it is important to note that there are other CONAMA resolutions with precise requirements to be followed by oil 
and gas companies. For example CONAMA Resolution 393/2007 and 398/2008, which detail, respectively, contents of oils and greases 
in produced water and the platforms and drilling rigs “Individual Emergency Plans”. 
161 One example of “enterprise located or developed jointly in Brazil and in a neighboring country” is the Itaipu hydroelectric dam on the 
Paraná River located on the border between Brazil and Paraguay; “in two or more states” refers to another case when the project lies 
exactly on the border of two or more states. For the oil and gas sector this refers to pipelines or seismic lines. 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  106 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

expansion of federal authority, including projects in accordance with “typologies to be established by an act 
of the Executive Power, based on propositions of a National Tripartite Commission,162 ensured the 
participation of a member of the CONAMA, and considered the criteria of size, polluting potential and the 
nature of the activity or project". Such typologies should be defined by a decree yet to be published. The 
proposal is to transfer the responsibility of environmental permit from the state to the federal agency, for 
projects such as small hydroelectric plants above a given generation capacity, some harbour facilities in 
inland waters and the "production of unconventional resources"163.  If this is so, the environmental permit for 
onshore exploratory phase, including the drilling of wells, will be granted and supervised by the state, until 
the commerciality of an unconventional reservoir is established and the production phase begins, when 
Ibama will assume the permitting process. In consequence, when considering unconventional oil and gas, 
the same activity (for example hydraulic fracturing, with injection of high volumes of fluid associated to 
horizontal wells), which will occur in both the exploratory phase and the production phase, will be permitted 
by the state at exploration stage and permitted by the federal agency at production stage. There is, however, 
no definition so far of what studies and/or procedures will be required to the concessionaries by either the 
state or federal environmental agency.  

5.3  Other Activities 

Other aspects or activities related to the oil and gas industry are dealt by other specific regulations, as 
follows: 

  Land take: it is necessary to have an authorization from the land owner (even for seismic lines), 

but as the underground resources are owned by the Union, the “agreement” is mandatory on 
practical grounds; otherwise the land may be expropriated. Permit constraints determined by 
the environment agency may prohibit the activity in certain areas due to the presence of 
vegetation (e.g. riparian). 

  Area reclamation: There are ANP resolutions regulating the recovery of areas after seismic 

activities; drilling and production phase. Well abandonment is also dealt by an ANP resolution. 
These resolutions and other constraints are often demanded by state environmental agencies. 
  Effects on biodiversity: (direct loss of habitat and wildlife, impacts on connectivity from “linear 
features”, as deployment of pipelines, impacts from noise and intrusion) are considered at the 
EIA or other studies and is up to the environment agency to demand for changes or mitigation 
measures in the original project. 

  Effects on air quality from construction/transport activities: Some environment state 
agencies demand studies on the activities effects on air quality and require the necessary 
changes or mitigation measures in the original project. 

  Effects on water courses and ground water from discharges and accidental releases: 

Some state agencies demand the monitoring of water courses and groundwater in the 
potentially affected area. 

  Effects on water resources from additional demand:  The use of water under federal domain 

is regulated by federal law 9,433/1997. A specific grant is demanded by the National Water 
Agency in case of “derivation or abstraction of water body for final consumption, including public 
supply or input of the production process; the extraction of water from underground aquifer for 
final consumption or as an input to the production process; release of sewage and other liquid 

                                                            

162 A Commission formed by representatives of federal government, states, federal district and municipalities, with the aim of promoting 
shared and decentralized environmental management among federative instances. 
163 The definition of unconventional resources at the draft version of the decree is the same as the one adopted at the concession 
agreements for the 12th bidding round for exploratory blocks: “accumulation of oil and natural gas that unlike conventional hydrocarbons 
is not significantly affected by hydrodynamic influences and whose existence is not conditioned by a geological structure or stratigraphic 
condition, typically requiring special extraction technologies, such as horizontal or high angle wells and hydraulic fracturing or heating 
retort. Included in this definition are the extra-heavy oil, the oil extracted from the tar sands, the shale oil, as well the oil extracted from 
the rich organic matter shale (oil shale) and from very low porosity formations (tight oil). Also to be considered in the definition, are the 
coal bed methane and methane hydrates, as well as the natural gas extracted from shale (shale gas) and formations with very low 
porosity (tight gas). 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  107 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

or gaseous waste, treated or not, for the purpose of dilution, transport or disposal; use of water 
resources for the purpose of hydroelectric generation; other uses that modify the system, the 
quantity or quality of existing water in a body of water”. Although the 9,433/1997 Federal Law 
determines that the extraction of water from aquifers for final consumption or for use in a 
production process is subjected to water use right (Article 12), the Brazilian Federal Constitution 
settles that groundwater is a State domain good and in consequence, the water use right will be 
granted by the state where the activity is located. Article 12 also defines when a grant is not 
required:  
  the use of water resources to meet the needs of small populations groups scattered in rural 

areas;  

  deviation, catchment or discharge that are considered insignificant;  

  impoundment of volumes of water that are considered insignificant.  
Each state has broadly the same regulation for state water use. Nevertheless the CONAMA 
Resolutions related to environmental permit don’t explicitly mention the use of water.   

  Produced water in the offshore environment is dealt by CONAMA Resolution 393/2007; 

emergency plans are considered in CONAMA Resolution 398/2008; the classification of water 
bodies, environmental guidelines for framework, conditions and standards to effluent discharge, 
among other issues, are dealt by CONAMA Resolutions 357/2005 and 430/2011; CONAMA 
Resolution 396/08 provides the classification of groundwater. 

  Management of wastes, including management of wastewater: Generally the permit is 

conditionally issued demanding the development of a waste management programme 
previously approved by the environment agency. The discard of produced water offshore is 
regulated by CONAMA resolution 393/2007 and the injection or discard of produced water 
should be detailed in the development plans approved by ANP, concerning production fields. 
Ibama has determined procedures for the disposal of drill cuttings and oil and synthetic-based 
muds, at sea (e.g. oil and synthetic-based muds may be discarded when adhered to drill 
cuttings and with polyaromatic hydrocarbons concentration less than 10ppm). 

  Effects on climate change from fugitive, vented and flaring: ANP resolution 249/2000 

establish limits to flaring and venting, but not to fugitive emissions. Although there is no clear 
standards or limits defined in any specific legislation, Ibama imposes constraints on flaring 
associated to an environmental permit (e.g. environmental permit for “Operation” of an offshore 
platform - “no production of oil and natural gas are authorized beyond the period of 150 days 
from the start of production, if the reinjection of surplus gas is not possible”).  There is no 
prohibition on the use of ponds in ANP resolution 21/2014 (hydraulic fracturing).   
  ‘Local’ commitments to use local labour: no requirement in force. However the 

concessionaires consider the use of local labour as a “positive impact” in the environmental 
studies. 

  Monitoring commitments and well closure: commitments/obligations once wells are 

completed are considered in ANP resolution 21/2014.  

  Compensation for GHG emission: Ibama has been demanding compensations for emissions 

of GHG during extended well tests and even during the production phase of offshore fields. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  108 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

5.4 

Strategic Environmental Assessment 

In 2003, the CNPE164  issued Resolution nº 8, which required that ANP should select areas for bidding, 
considering the exclusion of those with environmental restrictions, supported by a “joint agreement” of ANP, 
Ibama and state environmental agencies. 
Prior to this resolution, there was no systematic evaluation of the suitability of proposed exploration and 
production activities to the environmental features of areas/blocks to be licensed by ANP.  This had led to 
cases of conflict, with delays in the issuing of environmental permits, especially in blocks in shallow water 
and near the coast. One example was the denial of the environmental permit for the seismic activity in block 
BM-ES-21, in the Espírito Santo basin, granted by ANP in 4th bidding round in 2002, due to the existence of 
"environmentally sensitive areas"165.  
ANP identifies initial exclusions based on sensitivities (such as overlapping conservation units or indigenous 
lands) and after submissions received from federal and state agencies, proposes exclusions from the areas 
to be licensed for the final approval by the CNPE.  The subsequent award of the licence does not except the 
licensee from requirements to meet in full the conditions defined in CONAMA resolutions and Ordinance 
422. 

In 2012, the Ministries of the Environment and Energy and Mines, also with the participation of oil and gas 
industry representatives, established a discussion forum in order to seek a more consistent basis to the 
definition of environmentally suitable areas for the development of exploration and production activity. The 
discussions led to the publication of the Interministerial Ordinance 198/2012.  
The ordinance adopted a procedure of prior environmental evaluation (“environmental assessment of 
sedimentary area”), similar to Strategic Environmental Assessment.166 The proposal considers that the 
assessments will be developed over the next few years, by defining a set of areas "suitable", "not suitable" or 
under moratorium (on the basis of the need for more in-depth studies), in relation to the exploration and 
production of oil and natural gas. While the evaluations are not concluded, the ordinance determines an 
open ended period, along which prevail the agreements, as provided for in Resolution CNPE 8/2003, that is, 
as long as a specific basin is not assessed the approach determined by the Resolution 8/2003 will be 
maintained – a joint agreement of ANP, Ibama and state environmental agencies, excluding those areas 
considered by environment agencies as not suitable for exploration and production activities. 
Yet, even for the areas classified as suitable for exploration and production activities according the 
assessment of sedimentary areas, the environmental permit itself, for each project or exploration and 
production activity, will be still needed as a discretionary act of the competent environmental agency. What is 
assumed is that the necessary procedures to get the environmental permit will be simplified, depending only 
on supplementary studies. 

5.5  Unconventional Resources and Resolution ANP 21/2014 

ANP published a specific resolution (Resolution ANP 21/2014), based on a comprehensive compilation of 
international experiences, aiming to regulate “well drilling followed by the employment of the technique of 
hydraulic fracturing for the production of unconventional resources".  Specifically, it established the essential 
                                                            

164 The National Council for Energy Policy - CNPE, chaired by the Minister of Mines and Energy, is an advisory body to the President to 
formulate policies and guidelines for energy. 
165 Environmental sensitive area is not a formal term.  Any area may be considered “sensitive” by the environment agency for its 
biodiversity and degree of conservation.   
166  The  ordinance  198/2012  defines  the  responsibilities  concerning  the  assessments  (The  Ministries  of  Mines  and  Energy  and  the 
Environment) and the composition of a “Technical Committee” (the federal environment agency – Ibama; the “Chico Mendes Institute for 
the Conservation of Biodiversity” – ICMBio, responsible for the management of conservation areas in Brazil and ANP). The Ministries of 
Mines and Energy and the Environment may also invite representatives of other agencies or entities to compose the Committee (e.g. 
the states environment agencies).  The ordinance also establishes the timing for the public hearings (for the appreciation of the Term of 
Reference  and  the  final  report)  concerning  oil  and  gas  activities;  present  an  environmental  diagnosis  considering    regional 
characterization of physical, biotic and socioeconomic resources; development of a hydrodynamic baseline, implemented by means of 
“numerical modeling using updated historical data” as input for modeling of oil and pollutants drift in the study region  (offshore); and 
recommendations to be considered for environmental permits, such as: specific mitigating measures, technological requirements and 
specific studies and monitoring. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  109 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

requirements and safety standards for operating and preserving the environment for the activity of hydraulic 
fracturing in an unconventional reservoir.   
The Resolution defines "hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoir" as the "injection technique of 
pressurized fluids in a well, in volumes above 3,000 m³, with the objective of creating fractures in a particular 
rocky formation whose permeability is less than 0.1 mD, enabling the recovery of hydrocarbons contained in 
this formation"167.  
It includes requirements for: 

  Environmental Management Systems; 
  Studies and surveys required for approval of drilling operations followed by hydraulic fracturing 

in unconventional reservoir; 

  Well design with hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs; and 

  Technical Regulations. 

Sampling parameters for flowback waters are also provided. 
In completing this study, a review of the current draft of the Resolution has been undertaken.  The following 
observations on the text of the Resolution are made for further consideration by ANP: 

  The definition of hydraulic fracturing in the Resolution is different from the definition provided by 

the Community Recommendation 2014/70/EU.  The Resolution definition is based, in part, on 
an exceedance of one volume (3,000m3) whereas the Community Recommendation defines it 
as a process requiring the injection of 1,000m3 or more of water per fracturing stage or 
10,000m3 or more of water during the entire fracturing process into a well.  There could be merit 
in considering whether the Resolution definition should be revised to provide clarity on whether 
it should be read as minimum total per well (over the lifetime of the well) or per fracture. 

  Article 6 outlines the requirements for the operator to publish information in an Annual Report 
on its website and is consistent with the principles of openness and transparency, which are 
essential to build public confidence.  Article 6 (iii) states that “specific information about the 
water used in fracturing clearly nominating origin, volume, type of treatment adopted and final 
disposal”.  This could be extended to include the availability and capacity of existing water 
resources.  A water demand profile could also be required which would be revised, when 
considering the effects of multiple wells on local water resources. 

  Article 6 could be extended to include a requirement that the operator provides, as part of the 

Annual Report, specific information on waste water arising from the fracturing activity, including 
volume, composition, treatment options and final disposal of residual waste water; 

  Article 6 could be extended to include a requirement that the operator provides, as part of the 

Annual Report, specific information on the monitoring of induced seismicity arising from any 
hydraulic fracturing activity. 

  Article 7 amongst other matters prohibits the hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs on 
wells whose distance is less than 200 meters of water wells used for domestic supply, public or 
industrial, irrigation, watering livestock, among other human uses.  The use of a minimum 
distance is consistent with international practice; however, it is noted that in other regulatory 
environments, which require a minimum distance between hydraulic fracture pipes and 
geological strata containing aquifers, this ranges from 600m -1,000m depending on source and 
country.  Either any activity closer than this specified distance is prohibited or a special permit is 
required.   

                                                            

167 It is understood that the intention was  to consider the volume per frack, but this is not clear in ANP Resolution. The aim was simply 
to distinguish the technique from the "conventional" fracturing, which is already part of the set of current methods used by oil and gas 
industry in the stimulation of reservoirs, in Brazil. As far as it is known the maximum injection volume used in the Recôncavo basin 
(Bahia state) was around 2,200 m3 in a single interval. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  110 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Article 8 requires that the operator provides ANP with a range of documents for approval, which 
includes a study and assessment of natural and induced seismic events.  The Resolution does 
not currently state would should or could be included in such a study.  Potentially this could be 
expanded to include matters such as: 
  Review of available information on geology, structure (including faults) and in situ stresses in 

the vicinity of the proposed site to avoid hydraulically fracturing into, or close to, existing 
critically stressed faults. 

  Results of 2D/3D seismic survey to identify faults and fractures. 

  Engagement with third parties (e.g. regulators, other operators, researchers) to ensure full 

awareness of any seismicity issues / proximity (e.g. to other underground activities).   

  Development of geo-referenced database of the zone before work commences covering 

geology, groundwater flows, pathways, natural microseismicity.  Require ongoing 
development as data is collected through exploration. 

  Modelling and risk based geomechanical assessments of proposed hydraulic fracturing with 

regard to faults (including maximum magnitude estimates). 

  Apply ground motion prediction models to assess the potential impact of induced 

earthquakes. 

  Identify potential seismic receptors within a defined radius of the well site (5km) including: 

wells, infrastructure, special buildings, residential buildings and industrial/commercial 
buildings.  Avoid high seismicity risk areas. 

  Minimum distance between hydraulic fracture pipes and geological strata containing aquifers 

(consistent with any amendments to Article 7). 

  Appropriate well design, construction, testing and monitoring.  
  Smaller test preinjection prior to main operations to enable induced seismicity response to 

be assessed, followed by succession of injections over short duration of casing length. 

  Monitor the fracture growth and direction during hydraulic fracturing using buried 

microseismic arrays to ensure hydraulic fractures / pollutants do not extend beyond the gas-
producing formations and do not result in seismic events or damage to buildings/installations 
that could be the result of fracturing. 

  Article 10 sets out the specifications of well design and should identify risks, aimed at ensuring 
the integrity throughout the life cycle of the well, even after its abandonment.  The requirement 
to consider whether any risks are associated with well abandonment may require a separate 
article requiring information from an operator regarding commitments towards monitoring (from 
either capped well head or any other ground water boreholes) for specific period (possibly 5 
years) and at what point any liabilities associated with the well would be transferred from the 
operator to the state (if at all).   

  Article. 11 concerns the casing and cementing program.  This could be extended to include a 

requirement that casing depth extends to a specified depth below any aquifer used for domestic 
consumption/public water supply.  For example, surface casing should extend at least 30m 
below the deepest underground source of drinking water encountered while drilling the well.  
The surface casing should be cemented before extending well below underground drinking 
water.  Production casing should be cemented down to at least 150 metres above the formation 
where hydraulic fracturing will be carried out. 

  Article 12 includes a statement that the operator may only continue the project if it is considered 

that there is an insignificant possibility that the generated fractures or reactivation of any 
preexisting faults extending up intervals and into overlying formations such as Water Bodies 
and Groundwater adjacent wells.  Currently, “insignificant possibility” is not defined; however, it 
could be linked to the use of a traffic light system approach, similar to that used by UK using 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  111 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

threshold values to suspend activity; however, would require a judgment on what was 
acceptable (UK uses 0.5ML) and could be linked to Article 25.   

  Annex II contains a series of parameters for which information is required from the operator.  
These include sulphides, metals and NORM.  It would be useful if threshold values could be 
provided with guidance for any further action when thresholds are exceeded.  For example, in 
UK, when NORM exceeds certain values, it is classified as radioactive waste and requires 
different disposal route to licensed disposal site.   

  There is a gap in the Resolution concerning the use of green completions as identified by UK 
and US government for the management of methane and VOC emissions and this could be 
included as a requirement.  The use of green completions could also lead to closed systems for 
frack fluid/flowback and the avoidance of storage pits/ponds (in UK the environmental regulators 
‘will not accept storage of flowback fluid in open surface lagoons’168). 

The Resolution also states that the approval of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs by ANP will 
depend on, among other requirements, the "presentation by the operator of the environmental permit issued 
by the competent agency, with specific authorization for operations of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional 
reservoir, when applicable". 
The environmental legislation so far does not include any requirement of specific studies or procedures 
relating to hydraulic fracturing in the case of federal responsibilities or in cases regarded as state 
competence. In both instances, such studies and procedures might be required as a condition for approval 
and issuing of environmental permits previous of drilling and production. It is also possible that such studies 
and procedures will be defined in the scope of a set of new types of permitting specifically related to drilling 
and production of unconventionals.  Within the UK, under the Infrastructure Act 2015, an operator now needs 
to obtain a hydraulic fracturing consent from the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) where 
hydraulic fracturing is proposed at a depth below 1000m (see Section 4.6.1).   

5.6  Conclusion 

The ANP resolution 21/2014 stands so far as the only regulatory framework for managing operational safety 
issues, as well as possible effects on the environment and human health, related with unconventional oil and 
gas. However, under existing Brazilian legislation it is mandatory that the development of unconventional 
resources, particularly the employment of hydraulic fracturing will depend on gaining an environmental 
permit. 
The environmental issues related to activities associated with the exploration and production of 
unconventional resources in onshore basins, such as drilling, production, transporting and further 
decommissioning, will be dealt by state environmental agencies. However, should the Decree regulating the 
Complementary Law 140 be approved, the environmental permit of the production phase of unconventional 
resources will be transferred to the federal agency. 

Given the importance therefore of the permitting process, it will be important to establish the appropriate 
matters for inclusion in the permit covering the management and control of any emissions and discharges 
arising from exploration and production activities.  
 

 

                                                            

168 Environment Agency (2013), Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance, Consultation Draft, August 2013  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  112 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  113 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

6.  Potential Implication for Brazilian Regulatory 

Framework for Shale Gas 

The exploration and production of shale gas represents a significant opportunity for many countries.  It could 
help address energy security, energy costs and the need for transitional energy sources in moving towards a 
low carbon future.  Brazil, as one of 10 countries that have collectively been estimated to contain nearly 80% 
of the world’s estimated technically recoverable shale gas resources169, is actively considering the potential 
for shale gas.  However, in common with many other nations170 considering the potential for unconventional 
oil and gas, the proposed development of shale gas in Brazil has also raised concerns regarding the 
potential effects on the environment171. 

Brazil is taking a measured approach to the development of a regulatory framework to secure the safe and 
environmentally responsible management of the effects arising from hydraulic fracturing (review of 
international research debated through stakeholder forums (the PROMINP project), informing a Government 
‘white paper’ leading to legislation).  Like Europe, unconventional oil and gas exploration in Brazil is in its 
infancy, and there is an undoubted opportunity to capitalise on the studies and experience of regulators and 
policy makers in Europe and elsewhere to identify the key effects arising from hydraulic fracturing and build 
on the lessons learned to develop and implement the measures necessary to minimise risks to the 
environment and communities. 
This study is a contribution to the PROMINP project, providing information and research from the UK and 
Europe as part of the review of international practice.  It has drawn from a substantial evidence base of 
international policy making, regulatory frameworks and studies regarding the likely significant effects and 
principal risks associated with hydraulic fracturing; however, due to the low level of exploration and 
development activity in Europe, much of the research into effects completed in Europe has had to use 
evidence from the US.  When considering its applicability to Brazil, allowance is needed, for the differing 
socio-economic, regulatory, environmental, geological and political context.  Timing is also an important 
factor.  A number of the US studies reflect past practice in differing US states, from an emerging industry 
operating under differing regulatory environments that would not be repeated in Brazil.  For example, 
evidence from the US suggests that up to 750 chemicals were used between 2005 and 2009 in shale gas 
drilling throughout the US172 and which included the use of toxic and carcinogenic substances, such as 
benzene and lead.  Given the stated intention in ANP Resolution 21/2014 to preserve the environment and 
enforce best practice, it seems improbable that the same concerns highlighted in the US regarding the under 
regulated use of chemicals in fracture fluid would be repeated, given the incompatibility with the stated aims 
of the ANP Resolution.   
The study has attempted to answer the following questions: 

  What are the likely significant effects and principal risks associated with hydraulic fracturing as a 

means to extract shale gas? 

  Can these effects be effectively avoided, minimised or mitigated to ensure that the risks to the 

environment and human health can be effectively managed? If so, how?  

  What regulations are used in the UK and Europe to address the specific risks to the 

environment and human health from hydraulic fracturing? To what extent (if at all) are voluntary 
and best practice measures effective in managing these risks?  

                                                            

169 US Energy Information Administration, Technically Recoverable Shale Oil and Shale Gas Resources: An Assessment of 137 Shale 
Formations in 41 Countries Outside the United States, 2013 
170 BIO Intelligence Service (2013), Presentation of the results of the public consultation “Unconventional fossil fuels (e.g. shale gas) in 
Europe” Brussels – 7th June 2013, for the European Commission and DG Environment, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/Presentation_07062013.pdf     
171 Brazilian Academy of Sciences Letter to President Rouseff, 5th August 2013, http://jonathandealblog.com/2013/08/29/fracking-not-
welcomed-with-open-arms-in-brazil/ 
172 US House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce in CIWEM (2014) Shale Gas and Water: An independent review 
of shale gas exploration and exploitation in the UK with a particular focus on the implications for the water environment 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  114 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  What lessons can be learned from the regulatory frameworks employed in UK and Europe to 

the management of risks associated with hydraulic fracturing that could be relevant to the 
Brazilian context?  What specific recommendations could be made? 

What are the Likely Significant Effects? 
Table 6.1 provides a summary of the potential environmental effects associated with unconventional gas 
exploration and production and, for comparative purposes, conventional oil and gas.  It shows that the 
majority of effects associated with unconventional oil and gas exploration and development are common to 
those associated with conventional oil and gas development.  Differences however do occur when 
considering the technologies and requirements of the hydraulic fracturing process itself.  With regard to the 
risks arising from hydraulic fracturing alone, potential risks are likely to include: induced seismic events; the 
local sourcing of water, creating additional demand during periods of water stress; the management of 
chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture fluid, the management of flowback water and 
fugitive greenhouse gas emissions.   

Table 6.1 

Potential Environmental Impacts Associated with Conventional and Unconventional Gas 
Exploration and Production 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional 

Un-
conventional  

Theme 

Biodiversity 

 

Direct loss and/or fragmentation of habitat from construction and operation of 
well site and well pad activities. 

Indirect impacts on habitats/species due to, for example, disturbance from 
noise, human presence and light pollution and the introduction of invasive 
species and the exposure to pollution through causal pathways. 

Land Use and  
Geology 

Land requirements for pad and pipelines, disruption to soil layers and 
compaction and resulting impacts on removal of land for alternative uses 
(natural or anthropogenic) and ecology/ environment impacts.   

 

Induced seismicity from hydraulic fracturing activities and the potential 
impact on well integrity, creation of geological pathways for pollutants and 
possible minor earth tremors. 

 (in limited 
circumstance173) 

Water Resources  Surface spillage of pollutants such as diesel and drilling fluids and silt-laden 

run-off resulting in surface water pollution.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

Surface spillage of hydraulic fracturing fluids and wastewaters resulting in 
surface water pollution. 

Well failure resulting in pollutants released from the well to groundwaters.  

Introduction of pollutants due to induced fractures providing pathways to 
groundwater resources through either pre-existing man-made or natural 
structures. 

Inappropriate selection of chemicals in hydraulic fracturing and/ or unsuitable 
assessment leading to unacceptable risks to the environment from releases. 

Water consumption associated with hydraulic fracturing activities affecting 
the availability of water resources, aquatic habitats and ecosystems and 
water quality. 

Well pad development at risk of flooding and/or resulting in increased flood 
risk off site due to increase in impermeable area and/or location of facilities 
in areas of flood risk. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                            

173 Davies et al (2012) Induced Seismicity and Hydraulic Fracturing for the Recovery of Hydrocarbons, Marine and Petroleum Geology 
Manuscript, https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/InducedSeismicityfull.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  115 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table 6.1 (continued) 

Potential Environmental Impacts Associated with Conventional and Unconventional 
Gas Exploration and Production 

Risk/Impact 
 

Conventional 

Un-
conventional  

Theme 

Air Quality 

 

Emissions to air from well pad construction and drilling resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

Emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities resulting in adverse 
local air quality impacts. 

Climate Change 

Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from well pad construction and drilling. 

 

 

 

 

GHG emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities. 

GHG emissions arising from well completion. 

Fugitive GHG emissions. 

Combustion of extracted hydrocarbons generating GHG emissions. 

Waste Arisings 

Generation of construction and drilling wastes.  

 

Generation of flowback water following hydraulic fracturing activities. 

Cultural Heritage  Direct loss of or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes from 

construction of well pad and associated infrastructure. 

 

Indirect effects on the setting of cultural heritage assets as a result of the 
well pad construction and operation. 

Landscape 

Impacts and landscape character and visual amenity due to well pad 
construction and operation activities. 

Human Health 

Emissions to air, dust and noise associated with construction and drilling 
activities resulting in adverse impacts on nearby receptors.   

 

 

 

Contamination of drinking water supply due to hydraulic fracturing activities.   

Risks associated with the health and safety of workers onsite.   

Disturbance and nuisance issues  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Can these Effects be Effectively Avoided, Minimised or Mitigated? 
Given the commonality between the effects arising from unconventional oil and gas and conventional oil and 
gas exploration, there is a considerable body of practice available to address the issues concerning site 
selection, technology, construction practice, operation and decommissioning.  These measures to avoid, 
minimise and mitigate risks are contained in Section 3 of this report which itself summarises details 
contained in Appendix B.  Within the UK there is a long track record of undertaking conventional oil and gas 
exploration and production in an environmentally and socially acceptable manner, which suggests that such 
measures are effective in managing those effects that are common between unconventional and 
conventional oil and gas exploration and production174.   
The remaining mitigation measures identified for those effects associated with hydraulic fracturing (induced 
seismic events; the local sourcing of water, creating additional demand during periods of water stress; the 
management of chemicals and the mixing, storage and use of the fracture fluid, the management of flowback 

                                                            

174 House of Commons Energy and Climate Change Committee (2011), Shale Gas Fifth Report of Session 2010–12, HC 795, May 2011 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  116 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

water and fugitive greenhouse gas emissions) are, within the UK context, unproven; however, reflect expert 
judgment on what is most effective: 

  Management of induced seismicity: recommendations from the Royal Society and Royal 

Academy of Engineering in their 2012 report, ‘Shale gas extraction in the UK: a review of 
hydraulic fracturing’175. 

  Management of chemicals used in fracture fluids: requirements of the Environment 

Agency176, and the assessment of effects against the requirements of the Joint Agencies 
Groundwater Directive Advisory Group. 

  Management of water demand and flowback water: recommendations from Water UK 

research177 and recommendations from CIWEM report on Shale Gas and Water178.  

  Management of fugitive greenhouse gas emissions: recommendations from the Mackay and 

Stone report179 into potential greenhouse gas emissions associated with shale gas extraction 
and use.    

What Regulations are used in the UK and Europe to Address the Risks? 
The European Commission adopted Recommendation 2014/70/EU provides a set of coherent minimum 
principles that may be used for Member States that are looking to develop the exploration and production of 
hydrocarbons using HVHF. The Recommendation provides a common framework for competent authorities, 
operators and the civil society to work within.  It reflects a considerable body of work, including an 
assessment of risks, Member State practice and the scope of the environmental acquis and potential policy 
options.  It is however, not a Directive and so the extent to which it will be implemented across Member 
States remains uncertain. 
The Recommendation attempts to address the gaps identified within the existing suite of Directives and 
Regulations (the acquis communautaire).  These include: 

  Insufficient requirement for site characterisation and setting of baseline conditions for air, water 

and soil; 

  Insufficient requirement for subsurface site characterisation, including baseline conditions for 

deep ground/geology/seismicity; 

  No criteria or common principles available against which to perform a geological risk 

assessment; 

  No monitoring of injection tests/‘mini-fractures’ required; 

  Requirement for cumulative effects may be inconsistently implemented (e.g. of environmental 

impacts, traffic related impacts and land take); 

  Public participation not always required as it generally occurs upon the performance of an EIA, 
which, at exploration stage, is not required if the screening procedure concludes that the project 
is not likely to have significant effect on the environment;. 

  Post closure monitoring requirements. 

No member states within Europe have yet introduced specific regulations for hydraulic fracturing; however, a 
recent amendment to UK law (the Infrastructure Act 2015) introduces the requirement for a hydraulic 
                                                            

175 Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering (2012), Shale gas extraction in the UK: a review of hydraulic fracturing (Terms of 
Reference, pp 8) June 2012 
176 Environment Agency (2013), Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance, Consultation Draft, August 2013 
177 Amec Foster Wheeler (2013), Understanding The Potential Impacts Of Shale Gas Fracking On The Uk Water Industry-Stage 1, 
Report Ref. No. WR09C301 
178 CIWEM (2014), Shale Gas and Water: An independent review of shale gas exploration and exploitation in the UK with a particular 
focus on the implications for the water environment 
179 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  London: DECC 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  117 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

fracturing consent, to be issued by DECC to the operator, where hydraulic fracturing is proposed at a depth 
below 1000m.   
Whilst best and recommended practice and voluntary approaches are emerging in Europe and becoming 
more developed in North America, they are not well established or fully integrated.  Examples include a 
number of voluntary approaches which aim to codify and promulgate best practice , the Det Norske Veritas’ 
‘Risk management of shale gas operations – Recommended practice’ (DNV, 2013180), the UK Onshore 
Operators’ Group ‘UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines Exploration and Appraisal Stage’ (UKOOG, Issue 
3 March 2015181) and International Energy Association’s (2012) ‘Golden Rules for a Golden Age of Gas’ 
publication182.  Collectively, these combine risk management approaches with definitions of a number of key 
best practice elements for unconventional gas development which could make a useful contribution to 
developing industry practice in Brazil.   
What Lessons can be Learned from the Regulatory Frameworks Employed in UK and Europe? 
In considering the environmental implications of shale gas exploration and production, both Brazil and the 
EU have recognised the importance of undertaking a high level assessment of areas to be licensed.  Within 
the EU, this is through the implementation of the Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive 
(2001/42/EC), whilst in Brazil, it is under the Interministerial Ordinance 198/2012 (“environmental 
assessment of sedimentary area”).  Both require the licensing body to set out its proposed areas, identify the 
nature of any effects and identify where development will not be "suitable".  There is potential for the 
Ordinance 198/2012 to go further in the consideration of the scope of the effects considered (to ensure that 
they are aligned with those considered at the project stage) and to issue guidance to operators on matters to 
consider at the project stage.  At the project level, EIA is a common assessment tool across both Brazil and 
Europe, with appropriate matters identified through scoping.  As further SEAs are undertaken however, there 
should be greater linkages between the strategic level assessment and the specific issues addressed at the 
project level.   
The ANP resolution 21/2014 provides the clear basis for a regulatory framework for managing operational 
safety issues, as well as possible effects on the environment and human health, related with unconventional 
gas in Brazil.  In this approach it is analogous to the role played by the European Commission adopted 
Recommendation 2014/70/EU which provides a set of minimum principles that may to be used when looking 
to develop the exploration and production of hydrocarbons using HVHF.   
Drawing on the contents of Recommendation 2014/70/EU and the research findings completed as part of 
this study, there is an opportunity to refine the ANP Resolution further to clarify certain aspects of the 
Resolution in order to improve its effectiveness.  These are as follows: 

  Requiring operators to use green completions or reduced emission completions (as identified by 

UK and US government) for the management of methane and VOC emissions. 

  Reviewing the definition of hydraulic fracturing to clarify whether the volume of water referred to 

should be read as minimum total per well (over the lifetime of the well) or per fracture. 

  Extending the information required to be provided from operators to include consideration of: 

  the availability and capacity of existing water resources; 
  information on waste water arising from the fracturing activity, including volume, composition, 

treatment options and final disposal of residual waste water; 

  information on the monitoring of induced seismicity arising from any fracturing activity. 

  Ensuring any separation distances between wells and aquifers is supported by the most recent 

research and international practice.   

                                                            

180 http://www.dnv.com/industry/oil_gas/services_and_solutions/technical_advisory/process_integrity/gas_consulting/shale_gas/  
181 http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelinesIssue3.pdf  
182 http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/media/weowebsite/2012/goldenrules/weo2012_goldenrulesreport.pdf  

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  118 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Providing greater detail to operators on what should be included within the requirement to 

provide a study and assessment of natural and induced seismic events.   

  Requiring further detail from the operator regarding monitoring post well decommissioning and 

abandonment (from either capped well head or any other ground water boreholes) and clarifying 
at what point any liabilities associated with the well would be transferred from the operator to 
the state (if at all).   

  Requiring surface casing and cementation to extend to a specified depth below any aquifer 

used for domestic consumption/public water supply.  

  Providing a traffic light system approach to the control of hydraulic fracturing and any induced 

seismicity, similar to that taken by UK using threshold values to suspend activity.   

  Providing threshold values for specified parameters in flowback fluid for which action is 

required.   

The Resolution also states that the approval of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional reservoirs by ANP will 
depend on, among other requirements, the "presentation by the operator of the environmental permit issued 
by the competent agency, with specific authorization for operations of hydraulic fracturing in unconventional 
reservoir, when applicable".  The environmental legislation so far does not define what should be included 
within the environmental permit, and what supporting studies would be necessary.  It is possible that such 
studies and procedures will be defined in the scope of a set of new types of permitting specifically related to 
drilling and production of unconventional oil and gas.  As noted above, within the UK, a hydraulic fracturing 
consent is now required by the operator from DECC where hydraulic fracturing is proposed at a depth below 
1,000m (see Section 4.6.1).  In applying for this consent, the operator needs to demonstrate that it has met 
the following conditions:  

  The environmental impact of the development which includes the relevant well has been taken 

into account by the local planning authority. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the independent inspection of the integrity of the 

relevant well. 

  The level of methane in groundwater has, or will have, been monitored in the period of 12 

months before the associated hydraulic fracturing begins. 

  Appropriate arrangements have been made for the monitoring of emissions of methane into the 

air. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within protected groundwater source 

areas. 

  The associated hydraulic fracturing will not take place within other protected areas. 

 

  Cumulative effects have been taken into account. 
  Regulator approval has been given to the substances to be used. 
  Appropriate arrangements are made for restoration of the site, once exploration and/or 

production activity has concluded. 

  Relevant consultations have been completed.  

In absence of a current definition of what to include within an environmental permit for hydraulic fracturing 
within Brazil, the current UK hydraulic fracturing consent information provides a useful starting point and it is 
recommended that the PROMINP project considers the application of these requirements (or similar) in more 
detail. 
The PROMINP project also provides a basis to address a number of additional issues, to facilitate the safe 
and effective regulation of unconventional gas.  As part of this project, and aligned with developments in 
Europe we would encourage the consideration of the following issues to address the key risks identified 
through the completion of this study as part of the PROMINP work. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  119 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

6.1.1 

Capacity Building 

The need to improve data and information collation, research and knowledge base to establish a central database and 
information hub for information on unconventional gas operations available from site licences and research. 

The need to develop guidance covering unconventional gas that defines required practice (from a regulators perspective).  

The need for industry to develop good practice/codes of practice to be applied as part of site licence requirements and facility 
design (e.g. well casing, chemical storage, operational practices). 

The need for capability to be developed and enhanced within the federal and state environmental agencies to ensure that there 
could be effective implementation of any new regulatory requirements introduced (either under ANP resolution 21/2014 or 
under Complementary Law 140). 

The need for wider sustained engagement with the public, institutions, academia and industry to build a common 
understanding of the benefits, the risks, their management and mitigation involved in the exploration of unconventional oil 
and gas resources. 

6.1.2 

Zoning and Minimum Distances 

Buffer zones may be required from certain activities (e.g. water abstraction points, residential areas) to 
minimise / prevent pollution risk and nuisance (e.g. air quality impact, water pollution, noise nuisance) and 
potentially, it could be beneficial to establish minimum thresholds at the national level to ensure consistency 
in their application across the country.  It is recognised that this is a precautionary position; however, at 
present there are concerns regarding the potential effects of an industry new to Brazil, on sensitive 
receptors, and such a stance would help ensure such concerns are addressed directly. 

Require buffer zone from abstraction points and aquifers (e.g. in the US range from 150m to 1,200m for drinking water related 
abstraction).   

Require buffer zone from residential areas, schools hospitals and other sensitive areas (e.g. industry good practice 
requires1,600m distance where possible) 

Require buffer zone within which detailed noise assessment is required (e.g. 305m proposed in New York State) 

Require buffer zone from abandoned wells and other potential pathways for fluid migration (e.g. abandoned mines) 

Require additional containment for sites near surface water supply locations (e.g. 800m in Colorado).  NB HVHF requires 
monitoring for surface water bodies (natural or artificial reservoirs, lakes and ponds) and existing water wells within 1,000 
meters of the head of the horizontal well in resolution 21/2014. 

Require multiple geological barriers including minimum vertical distance (e.g. 600m) between the target formation and 
aquifers. 

Require minimum distance between hydraulic fracture pipes and geological strata containing aquifers (e.g. ~600m) and the 
surface (e.g. <600m depth requires special permit). 

Require optimisation of the number of wells pad density and pad spacing (e.g. one pad per 2.6 km2 proposed by New York 
State). 

6.1.3 

Baseline conditions 

Establishment of environmental baseline conditions to facilitate credible impact assessment (to be 
undertaken as part of the completion of the SEA and then individual EIAs) which enjoy widespread support.  
As part of the completion of the EIA for individual projects, this could require baseline conditions are 
established for: 

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  120 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Air quality 

Surface water quality 

Groundwater quality (and any groundwater source protection zones)

Drinking water abstraction points

Land condition (soil) 

Water resources availability (current and forecast) 

Traffic (particularly HGVs on local network) 

Noise (ambient levels for day time and night time and key receptors)

Biodiversity and any protected species or habitats 

Microseismicity including conceptual model of geological conditions

Presence of methane seepages 

Existing landuse, infrastructure, buildings 

Existing underground wells, structures 

Monitoring 

6.1.4 
Require continued monitoring of environmental conditions throughout lifecycle (exploration, production and 
abandonment stages) to facilitate ongoing management and performance assessment (to be undertaken as 
part of the fulfilment of permit conditions).  This could include: 

Air quality  

Surface water quality 

Groundwater quality 

Drinking water abstraction points

Land condition (soil) 

Water resources availability 

Traffic 

Noise 

Water volumes and origin 

Chemicals and proppant nature and volumes 

Energy source and use 

Greenhouse gas emissions 

Drilling mud volumes and treatment 

Flowback water surface return rate

Produced water volume and treatment solution 

Biodiversity 

Induced seismicity from fracturing

Presence of methane seepages 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  121 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Spills volume, nature, location and clean-up 

As part of the monitoring for key topics, information should be used to update models (for groundwater flows, 
pathways, microseismicity) to ensure fracturing programme is based on most recent information.  The 
microseismic and borehole monitoring and controls during operations should be used to ensure hydraulic 
fractures / pollutants do not extend beyond the gas-producing formations and do not result in seismic 
events/pollution incidents. 

Disclosure of Information 

6.1.5 
Without public disclosure of information, environmental performance cannot be openly assessed, monitoring 
requirements cannot be defined, stakeholder confidence will be low and independent scrutiny not possible.  
In consequence, open and consistent transparency will be necessary to build public confidence in the new 
industry.  The following could be required consistently as part of any permitting conditions. 

Disclosure of information (e.g. composition, product name, purpose and volume to be used) to the public of chemicals used 
for  fracturing,  quantities  and  composition  of  waste  and  wastewater,  results  of  monitoring  of  key  pollutants  pathways  (so 
monitoring borehole data) and seismicity data. 

Hydraulic Fracturing 

6.1.6 
Fluid contaminants transferred to groundwater and then to surface water via induced fractures extending 
beyond target formation, through bio-geological reactions with chemical additives, via pre-existing fractures / 
faults, via pre-existing man-made structures, well casing failures.  This can impact on aquifers and surface 
waters and is the cause of considerable stakeholder concerns.  The following could be required as part of 
any permitting conditions to address the risks associated with hydraulic fracturing. 

Maintain multiple geological barriers including minimum vertical distance (e.g. ~literature review has identified range from between 
600m -1,000m depending on source and country) between the target formation and aquifers. 

Undertake desk study and document potential leakage pathways (e.g. other wells, faults, mines) in sphere of influence of drilling and 
HF to inform development of conceptual hydrogeological model. 

Require minimum distance between hydraulic fracture pipes and geological strata containing aquifers (e.g. ~600m – 1,000m) and the 
surface (e.g. less than specified depth requires special permit). 

Measures should be adopted to ensure well integrity including consultation on well design with appropriate regulators, bore testing, 
cement testing, the installation of a cement bond and continual pressure and formation pressure testing.  The results of well integrity 
testing should be independently verified. 

Permits should require information relating to (inter-alia), the relationship between the zone of  interest and any overlapping or 
adjacent aquifers, methods of well construction, well integrity testing, where the well stimulation fluid is expected to travel, details of 
the liquids to be injected, water use and disposal of effluents. 

A Hydraulic Fracturing Programme similar to that in operation in the UK should be prepared by the operator and agreed with the 
relevant regulator. 

Where possible, non-hazardous chemicals should be used in fracturing fluids.

Consideration should be given to the development of a list of approved chemicals for use in fracturing fluids or, as in the UK, a 
methodology to enable regulators to assess the hazard potential of any chemicals used. 

Require development of a geo-referenced database of the zone before work commences covering geology, groundwater flows, 
pathways, microseismicity and subsequent updating of the model as information becomes available. 

Require modelling of fracturing programme to predict extent of fracture growth based on best information. 

Require monitoring and control during operations to ensure hydraulic fractures / pollutants do not extend beyond the gas-producing 
formations and does not result in seismic events. 

Implement remedial measures if well failure occurs and/or abandon well safely.

Maintain multiple geological barriers including minimum vertical distance (e.g. 600m) between the target formation and aquifers.

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  122 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

6.1.7 

Induced Seismicity 

There is the potential for minor earth tremors (e.g. the largest of the earth tremors at the Preese Hall well in 
the UK during April and May 2011 had a magnitude of 2.3 following hydraulic fracturing) arising from HVHF.  
Multiple developments could increase the risk of events affecting other operations, e.g. affecting well 
integrity.  It has been the cause of considerable stakeholder concerns, although within the UK, the effects as 
described in the media have been overstated.  The following could be required as part of any permitting 
conditions to address the risks associated with induced seismicity. 

Operator to review available information on geology, structure (including faults) and in situ stresses in the vicinity of the 
proposed site to avoid hydraulically fracturing into, or close to, existing critically stressed faults. 

Operator to conduct 2D seismic survey to identify faults and fractures and to develop 3D model of target formation, including 
identification of faults. 

Operator to engage with third parties (e.g. regulators, other operators, researchers) to ensure fully aware of any issues / 
proximity (e.g. to other underground activities).  Sharing of information to ensure that all operators in a gas play are aware of 
risks and can therefore plan.  

Require development of geo-referenced database of the zone before work commences covering geology, groundwater flows, 
pathways, natural microseismicity.  Require ongoing development as data is collected through exploration. 

Carry out modelling and risk based geomechanical assessments of proposed hydraulic fracturing with regard to faults 
(including maximum magnitude estimates). 

Apply ground motion prediction models to assess the potential impact of induced earthquakes. 

Identify potential seismic receptors within a defined radius of the well site (5km) including: wells, infrastructure, special 
buildings, residential buildings and industrial/commercial buildings.  Avoid high seismicity risk areas. 

Require minimum distance between hydraulic fracture pipes and geological strata containing aquifers (e.g. ~600m – 1,000m) 
and the surface (e.g. less than specified  depth requires special permit). 

Require appropriate well design, construction, testing and monitoring.  

Require smaller preinjection prior to main operations to enable induced seismicity response to be assessed, followed by 
succession of injections over short duration of casing length. 

Monitor the fracture growth and direction during hydraulic fracturing using buried microseismic arrays to ensure hydraulic 
fractures / pollutants do not extend beyond the gas-producing formations and do not result in seismic events or damage to 
buildings/installations that could be the result of fracturing. 

Monitoring background induced and natural seismicity before, during and after hydraulic fracturing. 

Implementation of the Traffic Light System (via the surface seismic monitoring array) and cessation of operation if induced 
seismic event exceeds 0.5ML. 

Determine the presence and levels of methane in groundwater, including drinking water through sampling of shallow 
groundwater during wet and dry periods and/or borehole to sample deep groundwater and characterise the hydrological 
series.  

6.1.8 

Carbon Emissions 

Gases released from flowback and produced water have the potential for cumulative effects over the lifetime 
of the well.  The following could be required consistently as part of any permitting conditions. 

Require preparation and implementation of an Emissions Reduction Plan based on the principle of as low a level as 
reasonably practicable (ALARP).  

Require reduced emission completions or green completions to eliminate gas venting and for capturing and cleaning for use 
of gas released from fracture fluid and produced water. 

Require enclosed completion systems be adopted to avoid venting from lagoons or tanks. 

Require flares or incinerators to reduce emissions from fracturing fluid at exploration stage (where not connected to gas 
network). 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  123 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

6.1.9 

Well Closure 

Wells may be temporarily suspended between exploration, completion and production stages presenting 
pollution risks if not plugged and managed correctly.  The following could be required consistently as part of 
any permitting conditions. 

 

Requirements for risk assessment, well plugging, inspection and monitoring (e.g. for releases to air, well integrity, periodicity 
of inspections, wellhead monitoring every 90 days) 

Require post closure well inspection and monitoring/reporting programme 

Require ownership and liability of wells to be transferred to a competent authority on surrender of the site licence 

Air 
Surface water 
Groundwater 
Drinking water abstraction points 
Land condition (soil) 
Biodiversity/ecology/invasive species 
Presence of methane seepages 
Landuse, infrastructure, buildings 
Underground wells, structures 

Require abandonment survey for 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
We recommend that a risk assessment is undertaken of these proposed measures (and those identified 
elsewhere in the report, (see Section 3) for their refinement and applicability to Brazil.  We encourage 
consideration be given to this work being undertaken by members of the PROMINP project team. 

 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  124 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  125 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

7.  Glossary and Abbreviations 

Term 

ALARP 

BAT 

CEMP 

CO 

CO2 

Definition 

As Low As Reasonably Possible.  This involves weighing a risk against the trouble, time and 
money needed to control it. Thus, ALARP describes the level to which see workplace risks 
should be controlled. 

Best Available Technique.  BATs are required to be considered (under EC Directive 96/61) in 
order to avoid or reduce emissions resulting from certain installations and to reduce the impact 
on the environment as a whole 

Construction Environment Management Plan.  A Plan which details management measures to 
adopt and implement during construction activities to avoid and manage construction effects on 
the environment and surrounding communities. 

Carbon monoxide (a colourless, odourless and toxic gas) 

Carbon dioxide.  A naturally occurring gas, also a by-product of burning fossil fuels and other 
industrial processes. It is the principal anthropogenic greenhouse gas that affects the Earth’s 
radiative balance. 

Conventional Oil and Gas 

Refers to hydrocarbons which have been previously sought in sandstone or limestone. 

Cumulative effects 

Effects that occur where several individual activities which each may have an insignificant effect, 
combine to have a significant effect.   

DCLG 

DECC 

Department for Communities and Local Government. 

Department of Energy and Climate Change. 

Drilling fluids / drilling mud 

Fluid or lubricant added to the wellbore to facilitate the drilling process by suspending cuttings or 
controlling pressure for example. 

EA 

Flowback water 

GHG  

Environment Agency. The non-departmental public body of the Department for Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs within England. 

Water and excess proppant that flow back up to the surface after the hydraulic fracturing 
procedure is complete. 

Greenhouse gases.  These gases absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the 
spectrum of thermal infrared radiation emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and 
by clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. 

Green Completions 

Green Completions are techniques used to complete wells to reduce the emissions of gases to 
air (also known as Reduced Emissions Completions; REC). 

H2S 

Ha 

HGV 

HVHF 

Hydrogen sulphide (a colourless, toxic, highly flammable gas). 

Hectare; a metric unit of area defined as 10,000m2 

Heavy Goods Vehicle.  Typically these vehicles are designed or adapted to have a maximum 
weight of 3,500 kg when in normal use. 

High Volume Hydraulic Fracturing or “fracking” is a technique that uses fluid, usually water, 
pumped at high pressure into the rock to create narrow fractures to create paths for the gas to 
flow into the well bore and to surface. The water normally contains small quantities of other 
substances to improve the efficiency of the process, e.g. to reduce friction. Once the fractures 
have been created, small particles, usually of sand, are pumped into them to keep the fractures 
open.  ANP Resolution 21/2014 defines HVHF as in volumes above 3,000 m³ whereas the 
Community Recommendation 2014/70/EU defines it as a process requiring the injection of 1,000 
m3 or more of water per fracturing stage or 10, 000 m3 or more of water during the entire 
frac-turing process into a well. 

Induced seismicity 

Earthquake and tremor activity caused by human activity. 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  126 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Term 

ML 

ML 

MWD 

NORM 

NOx 

Produced water 

Proppant 

REC 

SEA 

SEAD  

SO2 

SAC 

SPZ1 

TDS 

UKOOG 

Unconventional oil and gas 

Definition 

Megalitre; a unit of volume defined as a million litres. 

ML (local magnitude) from the Richter magnitude scale (often shortened to Richter scale) 
developed to quantify the energy released during an earthquake.  The scale is a base-10 
logarithmic scale. An earthquake that measures 5.0 on the Richter scale has a shaking 
amplitude 10 times larger than one that measures 4.0, and corresponds to a 31.6 times larger 
release of energy. 

Mining Waste Directive.  Directive 2006/21/EC on the management of waste from extractive 
industries and amending Directive 2004/35/EC 

Natural Occurring Radioactive Material.  Material that contains radioactive elements of natural 
origin. NORM primarily contains uranium and thorium (elements that also release radium and 
radon gas once they begin to decay) and potassium. 

NOx is the generic term for a group of highly reactive gases, all of which contain nitrogen and 
oxygen in varying amounts 

Water that returns from the well along with the natural gas after fracturing has taken place. The 
water may be naturally occurring and may contain residual fracturing fluid. 

Solid material, typically treated sand or man-made ceramic materials, designed to keep an 
induced hydraulic fracture open. 

Reduced Emissions Completions are techniques used to complete wells to reduce the emissions 
of gases to air (also known as green completions). 

Strategic Environmental Assessment 

Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment Directive.  Directive 2001/42/EC on the assessment 
of the effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment 

Sulphur Dioxide (a toxic and odorous gas). 

Special Areas of Conservation are strictly protected sites designated under the EC Habitats 
Directive 

Groundwater Source  Protection  Zone 1.  SPZs are areas defined by the Environment Agency 
as areas that highlight the risk of groundwater contamination from any activities that might cause 
pollution in the area.  SPZ1 is the inner protection zone; it is defined as the 50 day travel time 
from any point below the water table to the source. This zone has a minimum radius of 50 
metres. 

Total dissolved solids. 

United Kingdom Onshore Operators’ Group, the representative body for the UK onshore oil and 
gas industry. 

Refers to hydrocarbons which are located in tight sands, shale or coal which are now the focus 
of unconventional exploration.  However, the techniques used to extract hydrocarbons are 
essentially the same. What has changed are advancements in technology over the last decade 
(e.g. – hydraulic fracturing) which have made shale gas development economically viable. 

WFD 

Water Framework Directive.  Directive 2000/60/EC establishing a framework for Community 
action in the field of water policy 

 
Table notes use Body Small text style 
 
 

 
 
 

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr  

  A1 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Appendix A  
Terms of Reference 

 

 
 
 

 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

  A2 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Terms of Reference 
AMEC E&I UK Ltd has been appointed by the FCO to lead a study to provide an independent review of the 
risks to the environment and human health of shale gas exploration and production and the approaches to 
managing these risks through regulatory frameworks in the UK and Europe in order to provide the Brazilian 
Government (ANP officials) with information and best practices to develop strong regulation for the safe 
exploration of shale gas. 
The terms of reference of this review are: 

  What are the likely significant effects and principal risks associated with hydraulic fracturing as a 

means to extract shale gas, including geological risks, such as induced seismicity, 
environmental risks, such as groundwater contamination, and climate change risks, such as 
from fugitive methane emissions? 

  Can these effects be effectively avoided, minimised or mitigated to ensure that the risks to the 

environment and human health can be effectively managed? If so, how?  

  What regulations are used in the UK and Europe to address the specific risks to the 

environment and human health from hydraulic fracturing? To what extent (if at all) are voluntary 
and best practice measures effective in managing these risks?  

  What lessons can be learned from the regulatory frameworks employed in UK and Europe to 

the management of risks associated with hydraulic fracturing that could be relevant to the 
Brazilian context?  What specific recommendations could be made? 

The study will focus on the likely significant effects and associated risks to the environment and human 
health restricted to those associated with the onshore extraction of shale gas from hydraulic fracturing. 
Offshore shale gas extraction and the subsequent use of shale gas will not be addressed.  The effects and 
risks of other types of unconventional oil and gas, such as virgin coalbed methane will not be considered in 
the study. 
The study will concentrate on the risks to the environment and human health of hydraulic fracturing.  It is 
assumed that the existing oil and gas regulatory framework in Brazil is sufficiently robust to manage those 
aspects that will be common to shale gas exploration and development as well as conventional oil and gas 
extraction.  This is consistent with the focus of the Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering report . 

The study will focus on the regulatory framework itself rather than provide any commentary on 
responsibilities and effectiveness of regulatory bodies in Brazil.  A current area of comment in the UK is on 
the potential to reduce the complexity and increase the transparency of the regulatory regime ; although no 
UK Government response has yet been made. 
 
 
 
 
 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  B1 
 
 
Appendix B  
Environmental Topic Chapters 

Appendix B contains a detailed review of the potential effects of unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production activities on the environment and human health.  The review is presented by topic, as follows: 

  B1: Biodiversity 
  B2: Land Use, Geology and Soils 
  B3: Water and Flood Risk 

  B4: Air 
  B5: Climate Change 
  B6: Waste and Resource Use 

  B7: Cultural Heritage 
  B8: Landscape 
  B9: Health   

Each topic chapter contains: 

  Introduction – providing an overview and definition of the topic. 
  Assessment of effects – detailing the likely effects on each topic arising from the potential 
activities that could take place during the following six stages of unconventional oil and gas 
exploration and production: 
  Stage 1: Non-intrusive exploration; 
  Stage 2: Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing; 
  Stage 3: Production development; 
  Stage 4: Production/operation/maintenance; 
  Stage 5: Decommissioning of wells; 
  Stage 6: Restoration and relinquishment. 

  Mitigation measures – identifying potential measures to manage risks associated with 

unconventional oil and gas exploration and production activities at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

  Regulatory framework – providing a summary of the regulatory frameworks that are in place in 

the UK and Europe to manage the potential effects of unconventional oil and gas exploration 
and production activities. 

 

 

 
 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  B2 
 
 

 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

  B1.1 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

1  Biodiversity 

1.1 

Introduction 

Biodiversity in this context is defined by the Convention on Biological Diversity1,2 as “the variability among 
living organisms from all sources including, inter alia, terrestrial, marine and other aquatic ecosystems and 
the ecological complexes of which they are part; this includes diversity within species, between species and 
of ecosystems.”  Biodiversity is integral to the functioning of ecosystems and these, in turn, provide 
‘ecosystem services’ which include food, flood management, pollination and the provision of clean air and 
water. 

There are links between the effects on biodiversity and nature conservation topic and other topics in the 
assessment, including water, soil and geology, land use, and climate change. 

1.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on biodiversity arising from unconventional oil and 
gas exploration and production activities.  There are a total of six main stages of oil and gas exploration and 
production.  Table B1.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and 
decommissioning. 

Table B1.1  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage  

  Activities 

1 

2 

 
 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 
  Seismic surveys; 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 

  Well design and construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing including flaring. 

 

                                                            
1 United Nations (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity.  Available from http://www.cbd.int/doc/legal/cbd-en.pdf [Accessed April 
2015].   
2 The convention uses this definition to describe ‘biological diversity’ commonly taken to mean the same as biodiversity.   

   

April 2015 

  B1.2 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B1.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

3 

Activities 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 

  Provision of pipeline connections 
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation. 

4 

5 

6 

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3. 
 

The following pressures and risks in respect of biodiversity and nature conservation that are particularly 
relevant to unconventional onshore oil and gas exploration and production include3,4:  

  Direct impacts on habitats and species including: 

  Habitat destruction and fragmentation; and 

  Disruption of animal behaviour e.g. feeding patterns and breeding. 

  Water abstraction on or off-site; 

                                                            
3 DECC (2013) Strategic Environmental Assessment for Further Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing: Environmental Report.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/273997/DECC_SEA_Environmental_Report.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015).    
4 Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research (2011) Shale gas: a provisional assessment of climate change and environmental 
impacts. Available from http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/tyndall-coop_shale_gas_report_final.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.3 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Wastewater storage, treatment and discharge; 
  Impacts arising during construction: 

  noise/light pollution during well drilling/completion; 

  flaring/venting; and 
  local traffic impacts. 

  Atmospheric pollution (acid precipitation, nitrogen deposition); 

  Contamination of groundwater by fracturing fluids/mobilised contaminants arising from: 

  wellbore/casing failure; and 
  subsurface migration. 

  Pollution of land and surface water (and potentially groundwater via surface route) arising from: 

  spillage of fracturing additives; and 
  spillage/tank rupture/storm water overflow from liquid waste storage. 

  Indirect and cumulative effects associated with the above, including climate change and the 

ability of habitats and species to respond to changes.  

Non-intrusive Exploration 
The activities associated with this stage of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production 
lifecycle would comprise: site identification, selection and characterisation and the securing of regulator 
approval would be expected to be largely desk-based and in consequence, no significant effects on 
biodiversity would be anticipated from these activities.   

There is potential for disturbance effects associated with seismic testing, particularly in the breeding season 
or for vulnerable species.  Vibroseis is a common method of seismic survey and typically involves 3-5 large 
truck mounted vibrator units which sub-sonically vibrate the ground while a number of support vehicles 
record the returning shock waves for analysis.  An alternative to the use of vehicles are surface and buried 
seismic arrays which can be extended if exploration activities deem it justified on the basis of prospectivity.  
Whilst there is a considerable body of research in respect of potential effects arising from seismic surveys in 
the marine environment, there is no known evidence of onshore surveys resulting in adverse impacts on 
biodiversity.  The literature reviewed as part of this study does not identify seismic surveys themselves as 
representing a significant risk to ecology, although associated vehicle movements and/or the installation of 
the arrays may result in short term disturbance/habitat loss. 
As highlighted in the initial 2010 Environmental Report5 on the 14th UK onshore oil and gas round, surveys 
tend to be spatially restricted due to the requirement for roads or other hard surfaces accessible by vehicle.  
Where roads have to be constructed to facilitate access to sites, adverse effects could include habitat loss, 
disturbance and the pollution and siltation of water bodies, particularly where new roads are of a significant 
length.  However, any new access road would be temporary with land restored following completion of the 
surveys.  Where shot-hole techniques are utilised (which involve the use of explosions as a source of 
seismic energy), the requirement for large vehicular access would be likely to be reduced (although the 
potential for disturbance to ecology arising from the survey itself may be increased) whilst it would be 
expected that shot holes would be infilled after use. 

                                                            
5 DECC (2010) Strategic Environmental Assessment for a 14th and Subsequent Onshore Oil & Gas Licensing Rounds: Environmental 
Report.  Available from https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/66721/onshore-er.pdf  [Accessed 
April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.4 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
Impacts on biodiversity from this phase can arise from two separate operations: preparation for, and 
construction of, the well pad(s); and subsequently exploratory activities involving drilling, hydraulic fracturing, 
testing and flaring.  

The infrastructure required for the drilling and subsequent hydraulic fracturing of a typical 1.5-km-deep shale 
gas well consists of: a raised gravel pad occupying 1-2ha laid over an impermeable geotextile membrane; a 
stormwater system for capturing flowback water; new roads; compressor stations for pumping natural gas; 
and pipelines.  Well pad construction could result in the loss and/or fragmentation of habitat, the effects 
being direct (such as loss to the construction of drilling pads and access roads, fencing of compounds and 
degradation of habitats due to water abstraction) or indirect (such as disturbance from noise, human 
presence and light pollution and the introduction of invasive species)6.  The nature of potential direct and 
indirect effects on biodiversity associated with well pad construction would be similar to conventional oil and 
gas construction activity as well as other types of development (particularly where this involves the 
development of greenfield land) although the magnitude of effect may be greater owing to the differences in 
the scale of land take and intensity of activity.      
The effects of habitat loss and fragmentation are in the relatively early stages of research, but a review of 
studies conducted in Pennsylvania7 identified forest patch reduction of around 10%, and a consequent 
increase in edge (as opposed to core) habitats associated with road construction, in turn potentially 
influencing community structure (i.e. the composition and abundance of species occupying the same 
geographical area and in a particular time).  Habitat loss and fragmentation has particular consequences for 
fauna and flora which occupy specific niches and/or have limited geographic ranges, and it has been 
observed that industrial habitats generated by shale gas development were more likely to support common 
species that are ecological generalists rather than species of conservation concern8. It has also been noted9 
that degradation of habitat quality through disturbance can also influence the distribution of species and 
result in effective habitat loss, even in the absence of complete destruction. Light pollution for example can 
create fragmentation by preventing animals from accessing suitable habitat thereby increasing the risk of 
local extinctions and reduced genetic diversity, as  well as influencing the feeding behaviour of light-sensitive 
species such as bats10.  
A key issue associated with well-pad construction which could affect habitat integrity is cumulative land 
take11.  This reflects the need for a compound to accommodate the well pad and associated equipment 
which includes pits, impoundments, tanks, hydraulic fracturing equipment, reduced emission completion 
equipment, dehydrators and production equipment such as separators, brine tanks.  The effects of shale gas 
production on habitat fragmentation and degradation is the subject of ongoing research in the United States 
of America where, for example, there is evidence that generalist species are replacing specialist ones 
following habitat change12.  There would also be construction of pipelines although these could be buried to 
allow land to return to beneficial uses13.  

Typical land-take for a drilling pad and associated compound is approximately 1-2 hectares (ha) during the 
exploratory drilling and hydraulic fracturing stage (compared to 1ha for conventional drilling), reflecting the 
need to accommodate the equipment and storage tanks/pits, together with chemical additives and waste 
water.  The effects of habitat loss, individually and cumulatively, are issues of concern, but a lack of clear 
evidence to date means that their overall significance cannot be fully assessed14.  Disturbance effects could 
be significant for sensitive habitats and species or during the breeding season particularly where they are 
                                                            
6 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe p.250,  Table A6.2  and section 2.4.4.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
7 Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) Hydraulic fracturing for shale gas in the UK: Examining the evidence for potential 
environmental impacts.UK: RSPB p.26.  Available from http://www.rspb.org.uk/forprofessionals/policy/climatechange/action/ukenergy/fit-
to-frack.aspx [Accessed April 2015]. 
8 Gillen, J.L. and Kiviat, E. (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing Threats to Species with Restricted Geographic Ranges in the Eastern United 
States. Environmental Practice, 14: 320–331. doi: 10.1017/S1466046612000361.  Available from http://hudsonia.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/03/GillenKiviatFracking.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
9 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.27.   
10 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.27 and p.36 case study on bat behaviour. 
11 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014).  
12 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.26-27. 
13 See AEA (2012) Section 2.4.3.  
14 See AEA (2012) p.x. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.5 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

associated with the intensity of surface activity, such as during the well drilling and fracturing phase, 
involving considerable heavy truck traffic with associated noise and air pollution15.  It has been estimated16 
that the construction of a single well pad will require between 4,300 and 6,600 truck trips for the 
transportation of equipment, fluid, sand and other materials during the drilling, completion and hydraulic 
fracturing stages. 
In order to monitor the effects of exploratory drilling, a network of surface and buried seismic arrays is 
typically used, providing data on the location, extent and direction of the fractures that occur within the rock 
arising from hydraulic fracturing17.  Surface arrays require shallow pits some 0.8m deep covered by a 
manhole cover, each with a small junction box (1m square, 50cm deep) with an estimated time of 
construction 1-2 days.  Each manhole cover is surrounded by a post and rail fence.  Buried arrays will be 
drilled boreholes, say up to 100m deep drilled by a truck mounted rig, caped with concrete pad and an 
inspection collar, requiring around 4 days to install.  The Cuadrilla site in Lancashire, UK proposes a network 
of 80 buried seismic arrays and 10 surface arrays arranged over 25km2 area18.  As a consequence, localised 
and short term disturbance will extend beyond the notional 3 ha of the pad and is could require a walkover 
ecology survey19 of each location to identify potential significant effects on particular habitats or species.  
Whilst these are unlikely because of the small range of the individual operations, a precautionary approach 
to potential indirect effects on sensitive species (such as through traffic movements or human activity 
generally) has been deemed necessary in some exploratory work20.  Pairs of groundwater monitoring 
boreholes are also drilled in the immediate vicinity of the well pad21, and as such any effects will be part of 
well pad construction.  
Drilling associated with both conventional and unconventional oil and gas exploration and production may 
cause disturbance to ecological receptors.  The impact of noise disturbance on biodiversity associated with 
unconventional oil and gas drilling activity has recently been identified22 as an issue of particular significance, 
reflecting the fact that the drilling of wells from a well pad may take a number of years with each well typically 
taking 3-4 months of 24 hours/day drilling (the duration will depend on the underlying geology, well depth, 
the length and angle of the well, and any problems encountered).  Diesel compressors, for example, 
generate low frequency noise which can affect animal physiology and behaviour, the effects of which can be 
inferred from studies relating to road traffic and military operations23.  Studies in Colorado24, have found that 
the sound of 64 compressors outside a protected area resulted in an average 34.8-decibel (dBA) elevation 
above typical ambient sound within the protected areas, whilst nearest to the highest density of 
compressors, sound levels increased by a mean of 56.8 dBA above ambient conditions.  Particular impacts 
are to be expected on species which are sensitive to disturbance, such as breeding birds, where studies of 
the impacts of traffic noise25 found that along a gradient of disturbance, species richness consistently 
decreased as ambient noise increased.  Increased ambient noise can be associated with reductions in the 
detectability of territorial calls and consequent have implications for the establishment or holding of 
territories, the ability to attract mates and maintain pair bonds, and ultimately on breeding success26.   

Additional identified impacts include the potential introduction of invasive species (plants, animals and micro-
organisms) associated with the importation of water and construction materials on to the site. The specific 
sensitivity of the receiving habitats and associated species will determine these effects, although there 
appears to be an absence of research on this issue.  Notwithstanding, the risk of invasive species transfer 

                                                            
15 EC JRC (2012) Shale Gas for Europe – Main Environmental and Social Considerations: A Literature Review p.25.  Available from 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/sites/default/files/lbna25498enn.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
16 Broderick J. et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts.  Tyndall Centre for 
Climate Change Research, University of Manchester (Table 11).  Available from 
http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
17 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement pp.32-35.  
Available from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 
18 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp.32-35.  
19 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp.189.  
20 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Section 7 p.228 et seq.  
21 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p. 35.  
22 See Citation: Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.32. 
23 See Citation: Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.32/33. 
24 Cited in Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.32. 
25 Cited in Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.32. 
26 Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.32. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.6 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

would be similar to other forms of development and particularly those involving the importation of water (for 
example, activity involving the transfer of untreated water).  
According to the sensitivity of a site, restoration to its original state may not be possible following cessation 
of drilling activity.  
During both conventional and unconventional onshore oil and gas exploration operations, the accidental 
release of substances such as diesel and drilling fluids, silt-laden run-off and the deposition of pollutants 
associated with transport movements could also negatively affect biodiversity27.  With specific regard to 
unconventional oil and gas exploration, potentially polluting substances will also include hydraulic fracturing 
fluids.  At this stage, the risks posed by sediment runoff into streams and potential contamination of streams 
from accidental spills should be considered, in order to minimise the risk of impacts at a later stage in the 
process28.  Contamination of surface water or shallow groundwater by drilling and fracturing fluids poses 
risks to animal and human health, associated with elevated concentrations of heavy metals and total 
dissolved solids, requiring specialised wastewater treatment to remove29,30,31 (see also section below on the 
frequency and severity of pollution events during production).    

Production Development 
There could be a range of direct effects on biodiversity associated with production development activity, 
including habitat loss (from the land take for the larger production pad), severance (associated with road and 
pipeline construction, for example) and species disturbance including noise, human activity and light 
pollution which could affect sensitive species, particularly during the breeding season.  A typical 
unconventional well pad (containing one well) would be extended to approximately 3ha (compared to 1.9ha 
per pad for conventional drilling) during production.  However, multi-well pads are now widely used, where 6-
10 wells are accommodated on a single pad enabling a single multistage horizontal well pad to access 
approximately 250 hectares of shale gas play, compared to approximately 15 hectares for a vertical well pad.  
Assuming 3 hectares per multi-well pad, this suggests that approximately 1.2% of the land above a 
productive shale gas reservoir may need to be used to fully exploit the reservoir, or more if other indirect 
land-uses (e.g. central storage facilities and pipelines) are taken into account32. Research from the United 
States33 suggests that the indirect effects of well-pad establishment extend to an additional 2.4ha for every 
hectare of well pad area, or an additional 9ha per well pad.  
There could be localised disturbance effects, resulting from traffic movements34 and associated pollution35, 
although the precise impacts are uncertain and dependent upon mitigation such as routing of traffic. 

The accidental release of pollutants could also affect both habitats and species (see above). 
Water used during the fracturing process could potentially affect habitats and species especially during times 
of water stress, although within the UK, this will be subject to assessment by the water companies and 
Environment Agency (or Natural Resources Wales or SEPA) controls (depending on the location of the 
pads).  Risks associated with the introduction of invasive species through water carried to the site, for 
example have been identified36. 

                                                            
27 See AEA (2012) section 2.4.4. 
28 Entrekin S, Evans-White M, Johnson B and Hagenbuch E (2011) Rapid expansion of natural gas development poses a threat to 
surface waters, Front Ecol Environ 2011; 9(9): 503–511 p.8.  Available from http://www.esajournals.org/doi/abs/10.1890/110053 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
29 See Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.39. 
30 See Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research (2011) para 4.2.2. 
31 See: AEA (2012) Appendix 6. 
32 See AEA (2012) section 2.4.3. 
33 See Nature Conservancy (2011) “Pennsylvania Energy Impacts Assessment Report 1: Marcellus Shale Natural Gas and Wind,” 
available via http://www.nature.org/media/pa/pa_energy_assessment_report.pdf  p.18 reported in AEA (2012) p.32/33 
34 See: IOD (2012) Getting Shale Gas Working, Table 34 p.117.  Available from http://www.iod.com/influencing/policy-
papers/infrastructure/infrastructure-for-business-getting-shale-gas-working [Accessed April 2015]. 
35 See: AEA (2012) p.viii. 
36 See AEA (2012) Appendix 6. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.7 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Assuming that all operational activities would take place within the already identified site area, there would 
be no additional land take and hence direct effects on biodiversity.  However, there would be the potential for 
continued disturbance and/or displacement as a result of operational activities, including noise, traffic 
movements37, human activity and light pollution which could affect sensitive species (such as bats)38, 
particularly during the breeding season.  The accidental release of pollutants, including untreated flowback 
water from refracturing could also affect both habitats and species39.  The potential effects are likely to be 
locationally dependent, with sensitive habitats and species at particular risk. Research on biodiversity 
impacts associated with operational activities such as noise and light pollution and traffic movements cited 
above is applicable to this stage of production.  

Theoretically, indirect water pollution could occur40 through the migration of contaminants from the target 
fracture formation through subsurface pathways including: the outside of the wellbore itself; other wellbores 
(such as incomplete, poorly constructed, or older/poorly plugged wellbores); fractures created during the 
hydraulic fracturing process; or natural cracks, fissures and interconnected pore spaces.  The likelihood of 
such effects is highly uncertain given the distances between shale gas formations and groundwater.  For 
example, modelling41 of fracture pathways within the Marcellus shale formation across Pennsylvania, New 
York and West Virginia suggests that there is “substantial geologic evidence that natural vertical flow drives 
contaminants, mostly brine, to near the surface from deep evaporite sources.  Interpretative modelling shows 
that advective transport could require up to tens of thousands of years to move contaminants to the surface, 
but also that fracking the shale could reduce that transport time to tens or hundreds of years.  Conductive 
faults or fracture zones, as found throughout the Marcellus shale region, could reduce the travel time 
further.”  However, within the UK, the migration of fractures such that they would cause contamination of 
aquifers has been assessed42 as being of low risk, with fracking typically occurring 2km to 3km below the 
surface and the average drinking water aquifer being located roughly 300m below the surface.  By contrast 
“it is more likely that any pollution would come from drilling down through rock containing methane and 
where the cement or steel well casing failed.” This is corroborated by evaluation43 of operational impacts 
associated with Marcellus Shale drilling where it was concluded that: “Water-supply contamination from so-
called stray gas occurs more often from failures in well design and construction, breaches in spent hydraulic-
fracturing water-containment ponds, and spills of leftover natural gas liquids used in drilling.  Where 
groundwater has been impacted ... the issue stems not from hydraulic fracturing per se, but poorly 
formulated cement and improperly designed wells.” 
Additional abstraction of water to supply wells could affect wetland ecosystems through the lowering of 
groundwater levels, particularly in times of water stress.44  
The incidence of environmental pollution associated with drilling and production activity in the United States 
of America is reported45 to be declining.  A survey of events between 2008 and 2011 in Pennsylvania where 
some 3,533 wells have been drilled from over 100 drilling rigs, identified that where half of all wells involved 
some level of environmental pollution, this had declined to one fifth by 2011. Of 845 incidents that caused 
measurable amounts of pollution, 820 (97%) were classified as non-major and 25 (0.3%) involved major 
impacts to air, water and land resources.  Of all the pollution events, 38.8% involved site restoration, 30.5% 
spills contaminating water, 17.6% non-major land spills and 10.1% involved cement and casing problems.  
Of these incidents, some 3% created major problems for the environment, 1.1% from major land spills, 0.9% 
                                                            
37 See: IOD (2012) Getting Shale Gas Working Table 34 p.117. 
38 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) and Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.36 case study on bats.  
39 See: AEA (2012) Appendix 6. 
40 Broderick J. et al (2011) p.81-86.  
41 Myers T. (2012) Potential Contaminant Pathways from Hydraulically Fractured Shale to Aquifers.  Available from 
http://nofracking.com/static/media/PDF/Fracking-Aquifers.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
42 Davies R. et al (2014) Can fracking cause contamination of drinking water? Available from 
https://www.dur.ac.uk/.../HydraulicfracturesResearchBrief.docx [Accessed April 2015]. 
43 Considine T. et al (2012) Environmental Impacts during Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, Impacts and Remedies. Shale 
Resources and Society Institute p.8.  Available from http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-
Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
44 Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research (2011) Shale gas: a provisional assessment of climate change and environmental 
impacts p.59.  Available from http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/tyndall-coop_shale_gas_report_final.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
45 Considine T. et al (2012) Environmental Impacts during Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, Impacts and Remedies. Shale 
Resources and Society Institute p.19/p.30.  Available from  
http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.8 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

involving major water contamination, 0.5% from blow-outs and venting, 0.2% involving major site restoration 
problems and 0.2% from gas migration.  

Decommissioning of wells 
All activities associated with decommissioning would take place within the existing site area and therefore no 
further effects on biodiversity are anticipated.  

Site restoration and relinquishment 
All activities associated with site restoration would take place within the existing site area and therefore no 
further effects on biodiversity are anticipated.  Following closure, it is assumed that the site would be 
restored to as near its preconstruction condition as possible, although this may not be possible, particularly 
for sites in sensitive areas.  Over a wide area, there could be a significant loss or fragmentation of habitat 
depending on the number and spacing of well pads, but generally there is an absence of research on 
biodiversity impacts and risks following abandonment46.  

1.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle.  All measures should be part of a Biodiversity Mitigation Strategy (BMS) which details generic and 
more specific proposals for addressing identified impacts, with implementation overseen by an Ecological 
Clerk of Works47.  Typical measures48 include: 

  Pre-construction checks for protected species. 
  Programming of site/vegetation clearance to avoid disruption to ground nesting birds. 

  Ecological pre-start checks prior to each new phase of the project (e.g. drilling, fracturing, initial 

flow testing, extended flow testing, decommissioning). 

  Briefings and training for all site personnel prior to construction and each phase of the project. 
  Regular compliance checks undertaken by the Ecological Clerk of Works. 

  Yearly re-assessment of site vegetation to determine species use/presence. 
  Use of buffer zones where the works and access routes are in close proximity to sensitive 

habitats. 

  Application of specific measures to limit pollution of air and water courses such as through 

sediment polluted water. 

  Further specific measures relating to key habitats and species as required, including habitat 

creation if required. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Sites selected should be of low biodiversity value, and the presence of any sensitive species and potential 
pollutant pathways identified through desk-based assessment, walk-over surveys, and detailed species-
specific surveys49.  This could lead to the preparation of a staged approach to the identification and 
mitigation of impacts for specific species as illustrated in Table B1.250.   

                                                            
46 See: AEA (2012) p.69. 
47 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.252.   
48 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd 2014) pp.252/253. 
49 See: AEA (2012) p.283-285 Table A7.2. 
50 Based on Moore, V., Beresford, A., & Gove, B. (2014) p.33.  

   

April 2015 

  B1.9 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B1.2  Identification of Requirements and Limitations Associated with Sensitive Species 

Step 

1 

2 

3 

Description 

Requirements 

Knowledge Limitations 

Identify species sensitive to 
disturbance from fracking 
activities 

Objective criteria for species 
selection, ideally based on 
known responses to fracking 
activity, but could be based on 
responses to other forms of 
disturbance. 

Potential impacts on species 
may have to be inferred from 
their response to other forms of 
disturbance, but for many 
species, disturbance impacts 
are unknown 

Map the distribution of sensitive 
species  

Detailed distribution data for 
sensitive species, including 
foraging areas. 

Buffer mapped distributions by 
disturbance distances, 
categorised as high or medium 
sensitivity 

Species-specific disturbance 
distances and knowledge of the 
likely scale of the disturbance 
impact (high or medium). 

Detailed distribution data are 
lacking for many species, and 
knowledge of foraging areas is 
poor. 

Specific data on disturbance 
distances for sensitive species 
or the severity of the impacts. 
Consideration of the sources 
of, and interaction between, 
direct and indirect disturbance 
(construction noise, traffic, 
lighting, human activity) can 
inform the setting and 
appropriate distances and 
levels for some species.  

 
Site design and layout should retain or minimise loss of any valuable habitats or species whilst avoiding 
habitat fragmentation, particularly associated with road, rail and pipeline infrastructure.  Opportunities for 
habitat creation and enhancement should be identified for implementation during construction, operation and 
decommissioning phases. 

Risks associated with each stage of the operation should be identified and management procedures put in 
place to address these. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
The mitigation considerations identified for site investigation apply as well to exploration drilling and hydraulic 
fracturing.  The timing of activities (seasonally and project phasing) should also be considered, as should 
risks associated with the discharge of pollutants which could damage local and distant aquatic environments.  
These should be identified and addressed in the risk management plan identified in Stage 1. 

In addition to the generic measures identified in the Biodiversity Mitigation Strategy, mitigation measures 
should respond to impacts identified, such as51:  

  Loss of vegetation - replacement through boundary planting, using locally native species, and 

the preparation of a management plan to ensure their success. 

  Loss of foraging habitat and connectivity and species disturbance (such as through the effects 
of lighting on bats) – lighting to be directed onto site equipment only, levels of brightness are as 
low as safely possible, upward lighting minimised to avoid light pollution and height limits 
applied to lighting columns to reduce light spillage.  Species monitoring should be employed to 
assess changes in the levels of activity. 

  Loss of habitat for feeding and nesting/breeding birds and disturbance – off-site planting to 

compensate for habitat loss in areas unlikely to be disturbed by vehicle and personnel 
movements. In addition, habitat management to favour animals displaced by operations could 
be required52. 

                                                            
51 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp.255-261. 
52 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014)  p.261. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.10 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Disturbance effects - If construction occurs with the breeding season, a detailed Method 

Statement on measures to minimise potential disturbance impacts should be prepared prior to 
works commencing.  In addition there should be attention to site screening, lighting control (as 
specified above) and minimisation of noise disturbance (associated with 24-hour operation) 
such as through bunding (typically of 2-3m) and ‘soft start ups’ where machinery are started up 
one by one to gradual work up to full activity levels. Pre-construction training of personnel will 
be required, as will regular compliance checks undertaken by the Ecological Clerk of Works.  

Detailed protocols and management measures relating to the above mitigation measures have been 
established in the North East United States53 and concern:  

  Reducing Direct Impacts at Individual Well Sites: 

  Require multiple wells on single pads wherever possible; 
  Design well pads to fit the available landscape and minimize tree removal; 
  Require “soft” edges around forest clearings by either maintaining existing shrub areas, 

planting shrubs, or allowing shrub areas to grow; 

  Limit mowing to one cutting per year or less after the construction phase of well pads is 

completed.  Mowing would not occur during the nesting season for grassland birds; 

  When well pads are placed in large patches of grassland habitat (greater than 12 ha) 
construction and drilling activities are prohibited during grassland bird nesting season; 

  Require lighting used at wellpads to shine downward during bird migration periods; 

  Limit the total area of disturbed ground, number of well pads, and especially, the linear 

distance of roads, where practicable; 

  Design roads to lessen impacts, including two-track roads and limiting canopy gaps; 
  Require roads, water lines, and well pads to follow existing road networks and be located as 

close as possible to existing road networks to minimize disturbance; and 

  Require reclamation of non-productive, plugged, and abandoned wells, well pads, roads and 

other infrastructure areas.  

  Reducing Indirect and Cumulative Impacts of Habitat Fragmentation: 

  Preserve existing blocks of the critically important grassland and interior forest habitats 

identified in Grassland and Forest Focus Areas by avoiding site disturbance (wellpad 
construction) in those areas. 

  Monitoring Changes in Habitat: 

  Conduct pre-development surveys of plants and animals to establish baseline reference data 

for future comparison; 

  Monitor the effects of disturbance as active development proceeds and for a minimum of two 

years following well completion.  Practice adaptive management as previously unknown 
effects are documented; and 

  Conduct test plot studies to develop more effective re-vegetation practices.  Variables might 

include slope, aspect, soil preparation, soil amendments, irrigation, and seed mix 
composition. 

Where specific risks have been identified, such as a sensitive species, then a detailed mitigation plan will be 
required.  For example, an ecological assessment of the potential effects development on feeding grounds 
                                                            
53 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011) Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs,” Revised Draft, September 2011.  Available from 
http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/materials_minerals_pdf/rdsgeisch70911.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.11 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

for swans from an adjacent SPA/Ramsar sites demonstrated a functional link between the SPA and land in 
the vicinity of the development site54.  A mitigation strategy has been proposed for the time the birds are in 
residence (October – March) entailing:  

  screening of the compound to prevent disturbance; 
  active management of the feeding grounds in the vicinity of the compound including 

supplementary feeding; 

  minimisation of light spillage; 
  noise compliance checks; and 
  minimisation of vehicle movements.  

Potential risks associated with the introduction and spread of invasive species, and by implication encourage 
the restoration of native vegetation, should be set out in an invasive species mitigation plan. Measures could 
include55: 

  Prior to any ground disturbance, any invasive plant species encountered at the site should be 

stripped and removed; 

  All fill and/or construction material from offsite locations should be inspected for invasive 

species and should only be utilized if no invasive species are found growing in or adjacent to 
the fill/material source; 

  Only certified weed-free straw should be utilised for erosion control (of particular relevance to 

UK and Europe); 

  All trucks, machinery and equipment to be checked prior to entry and exit of the project site; 
  All machinery and equipment to be washed with high pressure hoses and hot water prior to 

delivery to the project site; 

  Run-off resulting from washing operations should not be allowed to directly enter any water 

bodies or wetlands; 

  Loose plant and soil material that has been removed from clothing, boots and equipment, or 
generated from cleaning operations would be destroyed or appropriately disposed of off-site. 

  Water should not be transferred from one water body to another; 

  Any top soil brought to the site for reclamation activities should be obtained from a source 

known to be free of invasive species; 

  Native vegetation should be re-established and weed-free mulch should be used on bare 

surfaces to minimise weed germination; 

  Only native (non-invasive) seeds or plant material should be used for re-vegetation; 

  All seed should be from local sources to the extent possible; 
  Re-vegetation should occur as quickly as possible at each project site; 
  The site should be monitored for new occurrences of invasive plant species following partial 

reclamation; and 

                                                            
54 Ecology Services Ltd for Cuadrilla Resources Ltd (2013) Impact Assessment and Method Statement – Site at Anna’s Road, Westby 
Lancs. Available from http://planningregister.lancashire.gov.uk/Attachments/6193/Annas_Rd_MS_10-2-13_final_comp.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 
55 New York State DEC 2011 PR (p7-88 to 7-94) New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011) Supplemental 
Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for 
Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs, 
Revised Draft, September 2011 cited in AEA (2012) p.173/174. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.12 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Any new invasive species occurrences found at the project location should be removed and 

disposed of appropriately. 

Managing the potential impacts of invasive species is related to minimising the impacts on biodiversity 
associated with water use, particularly related to the storage and movement of water.  A variety of mitigation 
measures can be considered56, including:  

  For moving fresh water between sites and/or discharges, transport unused fresh water via truck 

or pipeline to other drilling locations where it can be discharged into tanks or for subsequent 
use; and 

  If fresh water cannot be used at another drilling location, dispose of unused fresh water over 
land (not in surface water or in manner that drains directly to surface water), preferably in the 
same drainage area as collected, and using appropriate erosion control measures. 

  For vehicles and equipment used to withdraw and transport fresh water: 

  drain all hoses and equipment at collection site after use; and 

  clean all mud, vegetation, organisms and debris and dispose on site if the contaminants 

originated at site and dispose of properly.  

  Before moving to another water body, decontaminate equipment that has come in contact with 
surface water using appropriate protocols (pressure wash with hot water at contact point for 3 
minutes or disinfect with 200 ppm chlorine for 10 minutes); keep disinfection solution from 
entering surface waters. 

Production Development 
The mitigation measures identified for site investigation and exploration should be continued as appropriate.  
In addition, the effects of production development activities should be closely monitored for adverse and 
cumulative impacts, particularly under the high activity scenario.  The timing of activities should also be 
considered, as should risks associated with the discharge of pollutants.  It may be necessary to establish a 
buffer zone around protected areas, the size of which relates to its character. Habitat creation and/or 
enhancement should be progressed as appropriate.  

Production/operation/maintenance  
The potential impacts of production activities should be closely monitored for potential adverse and 
cumulative impacts such as disturbance effects of operations and potential risks associated with the 
accidental discharge of pollutants such as fracturing fluids and untreated flowback water stored on site. This 
is particularly the case where there are likely to be concentrations of well pads in a locality.  Specific 
measures on risk management should include: the implementation of already prepared plans to monitor 
impacts on sensitive species (both on-site and through vehicle movements) and accident prevention 
measures relating to the use and storage of material.57 

Decommissioning of wells 
Prior to site restoration, habitats and species surveys should be undertaken to determine biodiversity value 
and opportunities for protection and enhancement in consultation with interested organisations. Site 
management plans might be appropriate, particularly where opportunities for enhancement have been 
identified.  The Biodiversity Mitigation Strategy identified above should guide the application of any measures 
to protect biodiversity at this stage, including the transition to site restoration.     

Site restoration and relinquishment 
As for decommissioning. 
                                                            
56 New York State DEC 2011 PR (p7-97) cited in AEA (2012) p.262/263. 
57 See: AEA (2012) p.129-138. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.13 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

1.4 

Summary of Effects and Mitigation 

The effects of unconventional oil and gas activity on biodiversity interests are considered to be combinations 
of both neutral and negative in character, according to the stages and scale of operation, where the risks of 
the accidental release of pollutants, for example, are greater by virtue of the scale of activity.  There could be 
negative effects associated with exploration drilling, well pad construction and production activity, related to 
the direct effects of habitat loss and also indirect effects associated with noise, human activity and light 
pollution.  Other stages of the process are likely to produce no overall effect, assuming that suitable 
knowledge of habitats and species exists to avoid or mitigate any immediate impacts.  The following 
mitigation is recommended:     

  Site investigation: Sites selected should be of low biodiversity value, and the presence of any 

sensitive species identified through desk-based assessment, walk-over surveys, and detailed 
species-specific surveys.  Site design and layout should retain or minimise loss of any valuable 
habitats or species whilst avoiding habitat fragmentation, particularly associated with road, rail 
and pipeline infrastructure.  Opportunities for habitat creation and enhancement should be 
identified for implementation during construction, operation and decommissioning phases.  
  Site Construction: The mitigation measures identified for site investigation and exploration 

should be continued as appropriate.  In addition, the effects of production development activities 
should be closely monitored for adverse and cumulative impacts, particularly under the high 
activity scenario.  The timing of activities should also be considered, as should risks associated 
with the discharge of pollutants.  It may be necessary to establish a buffer zone around 
protected areas, the size of which relates to its character.  Habitat creation and/or enhancement 
should be progressed as appropriate.  These should be set out as part of a Biodiversity 
Management Strategy prepared to address matters relating to the development, operation and 
decommissioning of the site.   

  Site production: The effects of production activities should be closely monitored for adverse 
and cumulative impacts, particularly under the high activity scenario.  The timing of activities 
should also be considered, as should risks associated with the discharge of pollutants. 

  Site Decommissioning: Prior to site restoration, habitats and species surveys should be 

undertaken to determine biodiversity value and opportunities for protection and enhancement in 
consultation with interested organisations. A site management plan might be appropriate. 

1.5  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The UK is a signatory (along with another 189 parties) to the Convention on Biological Diversity , Nagoya, 
Japan, 2010 which sets out a conservation plan to protect global biodiversity, and an international treaty to 
establish a fair and equitable system to enable nations to co-operate in accessing and sharing the benefits of 
genetic resources.  The new global vision is: ‘By 2050, biodiversity is valued, conserved, restored and wisely 
used, maintaining ecosystem services, sustaining a healthy planet and delivering benefits essential for all 
people.’   The  parties also agreed a shorter-term ambition to ‘Take effective and urgent action to halt the 
loss of biodiversity, [so] that by 2020 ecosystems are resilient and continue to provide essential services, 
thereby securing the planet’s variety of life, and contributing to human well-being, and poverty eradication’.  
In March 2010, the European Union (EU) agreed to an EU vision and 2020 mission for biodiversity: 
  By 2050, EU biodiversity and the ecosystem services it provides – its natural capital – are 
protected, valued and appropriately restored for biodiversity’s intrinsic value and for their 
essential contribution to human wellbeing and economic prosperity, and so that catastrophic 
changes caused by the loss of biodiversity are avoided; and  

   

April 2015 

  B1.14 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Halt the loss of biodiversity and the degradation of ecosystem services in the EU by 2020, and 

restore them insofar as is feasible, while stepping up the EU contribution to averting global 
biodiversity loss. 

The European Commission adopted a new EU Biodiversity strategy to help meet this goal.  The strategy 
provides a framework for action over the next decade and covers the following key areas: 

  Conserving and restoring nature; 

  Maintaining and enhancing ecosystems and their services; 
  Ensuring the sustainability of agriculture, forestry and fisheries; 
  Combating invasive alien species; and 

  Addressing the global biodiversity crisis. 

There are a number of EU Directives focusing on various types of wildlife and habitat that provide a 
framework for national action and international co-operation for conservation on land and in the sea.  In 
particular the Directive 92/43/EEC on the conservation of natural habitat and of wild fauna and flora (the 
“Habitat Directive”) and Directive 2009/147/EC on the conservation of wild birds (the “Wild Bird Directive 
include measures to maintain or restore important natural habitats and species including through the 
designation of Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) and Special Protection Areas (SPAs).  These 
Directives are transposed into British law through a number of regulations and planning policy documents.  
These are transposed into general pieces of law, such as the Environmental Code in France and Sweden, or 
general pieces of law in the field of environmental protection, such as the Act on Access to Environmental 
Information and its Protection, Participation of the Society in Environmental Protection and Environmental 
Impact Assessment in Poland or the Federal Nature Conservation Act in Germany.  Specific implementing 
pieces of legislation implement specific aspects of wild life protection measures, such as the Order for 
obtaining derogations to the preservation measures in France, etc. 
Activities in Natura 2000 protected areas require a prior assessment procedure in Poland, France and 
Sweden.   

Under the Polish Act on Natura Protection, “any plan or project not directly connected with or necessary for 
the management of the Natura 2000 protected site but likely to have a significant effect on it is subject to an 
assessment procedure”.  During this assessment, the competent authority verifies whether the plan or 
project “would not adversely affect the site at stake”.  In case it would and there is a lack of alternative 
solution, a plan or project can be authorised “for imperative reasons overriding public interest only” and 
provided that “compensatory measures” are taken and the Commission must be informed.  For the sites 
hosting priority natural habitat types and/or priority species, the law forbids any considerations to carry with 
the plan or project other than those relating to human health or public safety, to beneficial consequences of 
primary importance for the environment or other imperative reasons of overriding public interest after 
obtaining an opinion from the Commission.  As a general rule of thumb, assessment of the impact on a 
Natura 2000 area is part of the E.I.A.  The General and Regional Directorate for Environmental Protection 
are the competent bodies.  The Directorate assesses the proposed project, including in particular the 
verification of the environmental impact report for the project, the acquisition of the opinions and approvals 
required by the Act, ensuring the possibility of public participation in the procedure.  The authority is 
responsible for carrying out the correct procedure and decides about a possible necessity of imposing the 
appropriate Natura 2000 assessment obligation on the investor. 
In France, the Prefects determine in advance the operations being capable to significantly affect the Natura 
2000 protected areas, under the form of a decree, after consultation of the Conseil Scientifique Régional du 
Patrimoine Naturel and the Commission Départementale de la Nature, des Paysages et des Sites.  
Applicants must file an application form to the Prefect.  A public inquiry is conducted.  The Prefect takes a 
decision within two months. 
In Sweden, a permit may be granted only if the operations: (i) do not harm the habitat in the protected area; 
and (ii) do not disturb the protected species in such a way that it affects the preservation of the species in the 
area.  During the application procedures for exploration authorisations, the Swedish Mining Inspectorate 
informs the applicant about the protected areas before granting an authorisation covering these areas.  The 

   

April 2015 

  B1.15 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Inspectorate furthermore informs the applicant about the consequences for the coming 
exploration/exploitation work.  The information is provided to the Inspectorate by the CAB and the concerned 
municipalities.  With a view of starting exploration activities, the CAB or the concerned municipalities can 
grant permits and/or foresee exceptions from local nature preserve regulations (municipality) and the 
national Natura 2000 regulations (CAB).  During the procedure for obtaining an exploitation concession, the 
Mining Inspectorate cannot grant a concession if nature preservation provisions and/or Natura 2000-
regulations are not complied with.  Binding opinions on this are provided by the concerned municipalities 
(local nature preserve regulations) and/or the CAB (national Natura 2000-regulations).  If the Mining 
Inspectorate disagrees with this opinion, the concession must be tried by the Government.  Verification of the 
Natura 2000 conditions also can happen under the overall procedure leading to the grant of an 
environmental permit.  The issue of a separate permit only may arise, when the impact of the foreseen 
activities on the protected site is significant.  The Inspectorate confirms that, as a general principle, in 
Sweden, no drilling activities are allowed in Natura 2000 and nature preserve areas. 
In Germany, no specific permit is required but, as a general rule, avoidable environmental interventions are 
prohibited whereas unavoidable ones require compensation, namely compensation measures locally 
(“Ausgleichsmassnahme”) or contingency measures elsewhere (“Ersatzmassnahme”).  The Federal Mining 
Act requires a weighing of the exploration or production activities with public interests.  In the Land of North 
Rhine Westphalia, the Ministry of Environment and the mining lower authority are the competent supervisory 
authorities. 
The Marine Strategy Framework Directive (2008/56/EC) requires Member States to develop a marine 
strategy, including determining Good Environmental Status (GES) for their marine waters, and designing and 
implementing programmes of measures aimed at achieving it by 2020, using an ecosystem approach to 
marine management.  It takes account both of socioeconomic factors and the cost of taking action in relation 
to the scale of the risk to the marine environment.   
Under the Ramsar Convention, wetlands of international importance are designated as Ramsar Sites.  As a 
matter of policy, Ramsar sites in England are protected as European sites.  The vast majority are also 
classified as SPAs and all terrestrial Ramsar sites in England are notified as Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest (SSSIs).   

UK 

The Wildlife and Countryside Act (1981) is the main UK legislation relating to the protection of named 
animal and plant species includes legislation relating to the UK network of nationally protected wildlife areas: 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs58).  Under this Act, Natural England now has responsibility for 
identifying and protecting the SSSIs in England.  The Countryside and Rights of Way Act (2000) (CROW) 
strengthens the powers of Natural England to protect and manage SSSIs.  The CROW Act improves the 
legislation for protecting and managing SSSIs so that: 

  Natural England can change existing SSSIs to take account of natural changes or new 

information;  

  All public bodies have a duty to further the conservation and enhancement of SSSIs; 

  Neglected or mismanaged sites can be brought into favourable management; and 
  New offences and heavier penalties now apply to people who illegally damage SSSIs. 

The UK Biodiversity Action Plan (1994) was the UK Government’s response to signing the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) at the 1992 Rio Earth Summit.  The CBD called for the development and 
enforcement of national strategies and associated action plans to identify, conserve and protect existing 
biological diversity, and to enhance it wherever possible.  The UK Biodiversity Action Plan was then 
established to conserve and enhance biodiversity in the UK through the use of Habitats and Species Action 
Plans to help the most threatened species and habitats to recover and to contribute to the conservation of 

                                                            
58 As amended by the Countryside and Rights of Way (CROW) Act 2000 and the Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) 
Act 2006 

   

April 2015 

  B1.16 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

global biodiversity.  In 2002 world leaders agreed in Johannesburg on the urgent need to reduce the rate of 
loss of biodiversity by 2010, and in 2007 they recognised the need to take action to mitigate the impacts of 
climate change following the 2005 Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.  
Since the publication in 2007 of Conserving Biodiversity – the UK approach, the context in which the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is implemented in the UK has changed.  Strategic thinking in all the 
four countries (England, Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales) has pursued a direction away from a 
piecemeal approach dealing with different aspects of biodiversity and the environment separately, towards a 
new focus on managing the environment as a whole, with the true economic and societal value of nature 
properly acknowledged and taken into account in decision-making in all relevant sectors. In October 2010, 
192 governments and the European Union agreed the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020, with its 5 
strategic goals and 20 new global ‘Aichi’ targets sets a new global vision and direction.  The resulting UK 
Biodiversity Framework is designed to identify the activities needed to galvanise and complement country 
strategies, in pursuit of the Aichi targets.  As such it is an important framework that is owned, governed and 
implemented by the four countries, assisted by Defra and JNCC in their UK co-ordination capacities.  
Although differing in details and approach, the four UK countries have published strategies which promote 
the same principles and address the same global targets: joining-up our approach to biodiversity across 
sectors; and identifying, valuing and protecting our ‘Natural Capital’ to protect national well-being now and in 
the future.  
The purpose of this UK Biodiversity Framework59 is to set a broad enabling structure for action across the 
UK between now and 2020: 

  To set out a shared vision and priorities for UK-scale activities, in a framework jointly owned by 

the four countries, and to which their own strategies will contribute; 

  To identify priority work at a UK level which will be needed to help deliver the Aichi targets and 

the EU Biodiversity Strategy; 

  To facilitate the aggregation and collation of information on activity and outcomes across all 

countries of the UK, where the four countries agree this will bring benefits compared to 
individual country work; and 

  To streamline governance arrangements for UK-scale activity. 

The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations (2010) requires that sites of importance to 
habitats or species are to be designated and any impact on such sites or species must be considered in 
regards to planning permission applications. 
The Environmental Protection Act (1990) sets out key statutory requirements for the UK regarding 
environmental protection (including waste and nature conservation).  
Section 50 of the Infrastructure Act 2015 inserts an amendment to the Petroleum Act 1998 regarding 
safeguards for onshore hydraulic fracturing.  These include a commitment that “hydraulic fracturing will not 
take place within other protected areas”, which will be defined in regulations issued by the Secretary of State 
for Energy and Climate Change.  It is noted however, that in the originally proposed amendment at the third 
reading of the Bill, protected areas included: 

  Special areas of conservation under the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994; 
  Special protection areas under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981; 

  Sites of special scientific interest under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981; 
  National parks under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949; 
  The Broads under the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads Act 1988;and 

  Areas of outstanding natural beauty under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000. 

                                                            
59 JNCC and Defra (2012) UK Post-2010 Biodiversity Framework.  Available from http://jncc.defra.gov.uk/pdf/UK_Post2010_Bio-
Fwork.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.17 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The Marine and Coastal Access Act (2009) sets out a number of measures including the establishment of 
Marine Conservation Zones (MCZs) and Marine Spatial Plans.   
The Marine Strategy Regulations 2010 transposes the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (2008/56/EC) 
into UK law.  It requires member states to: 

  Provide an assessment of the current state of their seas by July 2012;  

  Provide a set of detailed characteristics of what good environmental status means for their 

waters, and associated targets and indicators, by July 2012;  

  Establish a monitoring programme to measure progress by July 2014; and 
  Establish a programme of measures for achieving good environmental status by 2016.  

The UK Marine Strategy Part One addresses the first two of these requirements. Future consultation60 is 
planned on: 

  Proposals for the UK monitoring programmes for good environmental status (Autumn 2013); 

and 

  UK programmes of measures for achieving good environmental status (Autumn 2014). 

The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act (1949) aims to conserve and protect countryside 
and National Parks through legislation. 
The Overarching National Policy Statement (NPS) for Energy (EN-1) sets out the Government’s national 
policy against which proposals for major energy projects will be assessed and decided on by the National 
Infrastructure Directorate (NID) within the Planning Inspectorate.  The NPS identifies a range of generic 
impacts that may arise from energy development and associated policy including in respect of biodiversity.  
The National Policy Statement for Gas Supply Infrastructure and Gas and Oil Pipelines (EN-4) 
provides the primary basis for decisions on applications for gas supply infrastructure and gas and oil 
pipelines considered to be nationally significant in England and Wales. 

England 
The Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act (2006) establishes Natural England as the 
main body responsible for conserving, enhancing and managing England’s natural environment.  It also 
covers biodiversity, pesticides harmful to wildlife and the protection of birds. 
The Natural Environment White Paper (2011) recognises that nationally, the fragmentation of natural 
environments is driving continuing threats to biodiversity.  It sets out the Government's policy intent to:  

  Improve the quality of the natural environment across England;  

  Move to a net gain in the value of nature;  
  Arrest the decline in habitats and species and the degradation of landscapes;  
  Protect priority habitats;  

  Safeguard vulnerable non-renewable resources for future generations; 
  Support natural systems to function more effectively in town, in the country and at sea; and  
  Create an ecological network which is resilient to changing pressures. 

By 2020, the Government wants to achieve an overall improvement in the status of the UK’s wildlife including 
no net loss of priority habitat and an increase of at least 200,000 hectares in the overall extent of priority 
habitats. Under the White Paper, the Government has also put in place a clear institutional framework to 

                                                            
60Defra (2015) Implementing the Marine Strategy Framework Directive.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/policies/protecting-and-sustainably-using-the-marine-environment/supporting-pages/implementing-the-
marine-strategy-framework-directive [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B1.18 
                     
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

support nature restoration which includes Local Nature Partnerships creating new Nature Improvement 
Areas (NIAs).   
Biodiversity 2020: A strategy for England’s wildlife and ecosystem (2011) is a new biodiversity strategy 
for England that builds on the Natural Environment White Paper and provides a comprehensive picture of the 
Government is implementing the international and EU commitments. It sets out the strategic direction for 
biodiversity policy for the next decade on land (including rivers and lakes) and at sea. The Strategy has as its 
mission to halt overall biodiversity loss, support healthy well-functioning ecosystems, and establish coherent 
ecological networks, with more and better places for nature for the benefit of wildlife and people. 
The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) (2012) replaces the majority of previously used planning 
policy including Planning Policy Statement 9 on Biodiversity and Geological Conservation. The NPPF 
includes key policies to ensure the planning system contributes to and enhances the natural and local 
environment by: 

  Protecting and enhancing valued landscapes, geological conservation interests and soils;  
  Recognising the wider benefits of ecosystem services;  
  Minimising impacts on biodiversity and providing net gains in biodiversity where possible, 

contributing to the Government’s commitment to halt the overall decline in biodiversity, including 
by establishing coherent ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future 
pressures; 

  Preventing both new and existing development from contributing to or being put at unacceptable 
risk from, or being adversely affected by unacceptable levels of soil, air, water or noise pollution 
or land instability; and  

  Remediating and mitigating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated and unstable land, 

where appropriate. 

The Framework states that, when preparing plans to meet development needs, the aim should be to 
minimise pollution and other adverse effects on the local and natural environment.  Local planning authorities 
are expected to set criteria based policies against which proposals for any development on or affecting 
protected wildlife or geodiversity or landscape areas will be judged. In doing so they must take into account 
the policies in the Framework including those which set out the circumstances where in order to conserve 
and enhance biodiversity planning permission should be refused. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.1 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

2    Land Use, Geology and Soils 

2.1 

Introduction 

Land use in this context is concerned with the effective use of land, i.e. by encouraging the reuse of land that 
has been previously developed (brownfield land) as well promoting sustainable patterns of land use, e.g. in 
relation to the protection of open spaces and green infrastructure.  Geology and soils is also concerned with 
subsurface issues related to the effects of hydrological fracturing as well as the potential contamination of 
soils and high quality agricultural land. 

There are links between the land use, geology and soil topic and other topics in the study, including waste. 

2.2  Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on land use and geology arising from 
unconventional oil and gas exploration and production activities.  Table B2.1 presents a summary of the key 
stages of exploration, production and decommissioning. 

Table B2.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 
  Seismic surveys; 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 

  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 
  Well design construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 
  Provision of pipeline connections  

  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

 

   

April 2015 

  B2.2 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B2.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

4 

5 

6 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3. 
 

The principal effects are anticipated to be:  

  Land-take associated with exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing, amounting to around 3ha 

pad.  Further land-take would be required for access roads and pipework.  Cumulatively, there 
could be significant effects in a locality, which could influence farming viability for some 
landholdings.  

  Compaction of soils associated with the well-pad, with negative effects on high quality land. 

  Potential for induced seismicity associated with fracturing activity, although the risk is judged to 

be low.  

  Potential for the disturbance of contaminated land through construction and drilling activities 

and contamination by spillage during exploration production phases.  

Potential mitigation measures include:  

  Appropriate site selection to avoid sensitive areas; 
  Use of larger drilling pads to accommodate multiple wells thereby reducing overall land-take; 
  Attention to the potential for induced seismicity associated with fracturing though the use of 

detailed modelling and monitoring protocols; 

  Controlled waste disposal; and 
  Erosion control and land restoration. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Stage 1 of the oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle comprises non-intrusive activities.  Site 
identification, selection and characterisation and the securing of regulator approval would be expected to be 

   

April 2015 

  B2.3 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

largely desk-based and in consequence, no effects on land use, geology or soils would be anticipated from 
these activities.   
Vibroseis is a common method of seismic survey and typically involves 3-5 large truck based vibrator units 
which sub-sonically vibrate the ground while a number of support vehicles record the returning shock waves 
for analysis.  Surveys tend to be spatially restricted due to the requirement for roads or other hard surfaces 
accessible by vehicle.  Where existing roads and/or hard surfaces are utilised, any effects on land use, 
geology or soils would be negligible and in this context, it should be noted that vibroseis would generally be 
regarded in the UK as a permitted development.  There may, however, be a requirement for the temporary 
construction of new roads to facilitate access to sites.  This could result in the loss of greenfield land and 
soils and may obstruct the use of land (e.g. for agricultural use).  Where soils are high agricultural quality 
these effects may be more severe.   
There is also the potential for seismic surveys to affect geologically sensitive areas.  Notwithstanding, the 
area of land lost to development would be expected to be small and any adverse effects would be temporary 
with land restored following the completion of surveys.   

Where shot-hole techniques are utilised (which involve the use of explosions as a source of seismic energy), 
the requirement for large vehicular access would be likely to be reduced whilst it would be expected that shot 
holes would be infilled after use. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
Typical land-take for a drilling pad and associated compound is approximately 1-2 hectares (ha) for high 
volume hydraulic fracturing during the fracturing, compared to 1 ha per pad for conventional drilling1 
reflecting the needed to accommodate the equipment and storage tanks/pits, together with chemical 
additives and waste water.   

Land take associated with the exploration stage requires the clearance of vegetation through stripping and 
stockpiling of topsoil, then placing a layer of crushed stone or gravel over geotextile fabric.  In addition, 
erosion and sediment control structures are required around the site and lined pits to a capacity of around 
30,000m3 for the retention of drilling fluid and freshwater2 (although these are not permitted in the UK where 
all waste fluids are to be held in tankers and freshwater will be sourced either from mains pipes, licensed 
abstraction or tankered in).  
Over the pad area, disruption of soil layers and compaction may have a negative effect in terms of soil 
function and processes, although these impacts are generally shared with other large construction projects 
and particularly those located on greenfield sites.  It is anticipated that sites would be restored following 
either completion of exploration drilling or decommissioning of wells such that effects would be reduced in 
longer term (i.e. following exploratory drilling or beyond the site restoration stage, depending on whether a 
site is taken forward to the production stage).  Where development is located on land that is of high 
agricultural quality, or in other sensitive areas, effects could be more significant and permanent particularly if 
the nature of the sensitive area inhibits full site restoration3 or where development takes place in areas of 
intensive agriculture.  Drilling activity over a wide area, where multiple installations are employed, could 
result in significant cumulative land-take4 and has the potential to disrupt the operation of farming businesses 
through severance of land holdings, for example, although the overall potential impact and opportunities for 
mitigation will be a function of their size and nature of the business.  Generally, larger farms will have greater 
capacity to absorb impacts and be less sensitive to change, although detailed survey would be required5.   

                                                            
1 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011) Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs,Revised Draft, September 2011 cited in AEA (2012) section 
2.4.3 p.31.  
2 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe p.250,  Table A6.2  and section 2.4.4.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
3 See AEA (2012) p.31. 
4 See AEA (2012) p.vii.  
5 See Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement p.382.  
Available from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.4 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

There is the potential for construction activities and exploratory drilling to cause disturbance to contaminated 
sites which could result in pollution pathways being created or re-opened for existing ground contamination.  
However, the risk of any such effect occurring cannot be fully established until such time that sites have 
been identified.  Further, it is anticipated that ground contamination surveys would be undertaken prior to 
development in order to identify the potential risk of disturbance and appropriate mitigation, in accordance 
with the Contaminated Land Regulations and taking into account appropriate guidance.   
As with other types of construction activity, there is a small risk of land contamination from, for example, 
accidental spillage associated with oil and gas exploration.  With specific regard to unconventional oil and 
gas exploration, potentially polluting substances will also include hydraulic fracturing fluids.  It would be 
expected that any potential contamination would be sufficiently mitigated by following best practice guidance 
and through the use of a Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP).  However, it would not 
allow for accidental or unforeseen discharges.   
Pad preparation and the drilling of boreholes may affect land stability, geomorphology and/or soil erosion 
rates, on- or off-site.  The type/magnitude of the effects will depend on the geology and physical nature of 
the area and effects may be particularly adverse where activities are undertaken within or in close proximity 
to sensitive geological areas.  Within the UK, the risk of potential impacts on geologically sensitive 
sites/areas would be fully considered as part of the planning application process and in accordance with 
national planning policy and guidance including that specifically relating to onshore oil and gas (DCLG, 
20146).  Further, the potential for significant negative effects would be identified as part of the Environmental 
Impact Assessment (EIA) process (where appropriate).  

On 1st April 2011, the Blackpool area in North West England experienced seismicity of magnitude 2.3 ML 
shortly after Cuadrilla Resources hydraulically fractured a well at its Preese Hall site.  Seismicity of 
magnitude 1.5 ML occurred on 27th May 2011 following renewed fracturing of the same well.  Hydraulic 
fracturing was subsequently suspended.  Cuadrilla Resources commissioned a set of reports to investigate 
the cause of seismicity and DECC subsequently commissioned an independent review of these reports, 
which was published for public comment7.  This research confirms that the observed seismicity was induced 
by hydraulic fracturing, most probably through the injection of fluid into a nearby, but unidentified, pre-
stressed fault.   
The independent review8 concluded, however, that the maximum magnitude of induced seismicity arising 
from hydraulic fracturing operations in that area would be not greater than ML=3 which, according to the 
European Macroseismic Scale, would be equivalent to a passing truck, being felt by few people and resulting 
in negligible, if any, surface effects.  In this context, Davies et al9  state that, when compared with other 
sources of induced seismicity such as mining and reservoir impoundment, “hydraulic fracturing has been, to 
date, a relatively benign mechanism.  It is possible that fault reactivation by hydraulic fracturing might cause 
induced seismicity larger than that recorded to date, but a fuller understanding of shale geology can mitigate 
against this risk ” and that the likelihood of hydraulic fracturing “causing felt seismicity (M>3) is very small”.  
Similarly, the AEA (2012)10 conclude that: “In view of these evaluations and the low frequency of reported 
incidents, it is judged that the frequency of significant seismic events is “rare” and the potential significance 
of this impact is “slight.” Multiple development could increase the risk of seismic events due to one operation 
affecting the well integrity of a separate operation, although in view of the low frequency of the reported 
events and the established measures for monitoring well integrity, the risks are judged to remain low.”  
This conclusion has been corroborated by recent research11 which observes that: “The development of a 
fracture network of this size [c.600m] in one single tensile rupture would correspond to an induced 
                                                            
6 Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) (2014) Planning Practice Guidance.  Available from 
http://planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk/blog/policy/achieving-sustainable-development/delivering-sustainable-development/13-
facilitating-the-sustainable-use-of-minerals/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
7 Green C., Styles P.; Baptie B. (2012) Preese Hall Shale Gas Fracturing Review and Recommendations for Induced Seismic Mitigation.  
Available from https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/15745/5075-preese-hall-shale-gas-
fracturing-review.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
8 Green C., Styles P.; Baptie B. (2012).  
9 Davies, J.D. Foulgar, G., Bindley, A., Styles, P. (2013) What size of earthquakes can be caused by fracking?  DEI Briefing Note April 
2013. Durham University: Durham.  Available from https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/dei/ResearchBrief_InducedSeismicity_final.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
10 See AEA (2012) p.54.  
11 Westaway R. & Younger P. (2014) Quantification of potential macroseismic effects of the induced seismicity that might result from 
hydraulic fracturing for shale gas exploitation in the UK, Quarterly Journal of Engineering Geology and Hydrogeology (forthcoming - 

   

April 2015 

  B2.5 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

earthquake c. magnitude 3.6, although the probability of this happening is very low.  Events of this size ... 
might be sufficient to cause minor damage to property, such as cracked plaster; however, such occurrences, 
if they ever occur, will be infrequent.”  The research goes into to reflect on the potential for compensation 
arrangements in the UK: “If any such incidents do occur, they could be readily handled under a system of 
compensation similar to that operated by the Coal Authority for mining subsidence, or that operated by the 
Royal Air Force to compensate for the effects of sonic booms.  The data to operate such a system will be 
available, as seismic monitoring of ‘fracking’ is essential both to follow the progression of the process in the 
interests of the developer, and also to demonstrate compliance with any regulatory framework.  There is thus 
no scientific reason why seismicity induced by shale gas ‘fracking’ should not be regulated in a manner 
analogous to the way in which quarry blasting has been successfully and uncontroversially regulated in the 
UK for decades.” 
In addition to the UK, induced seismicity associated with hydraulic fracturing has been identified in two other 
shale gas fields located in the USA and Canada. Hydraulic fracturing for shale gas in these three fields is 
known to have induced 79 seismic events with a magnitude >1.  The largest of these was an earthquake of 
magnitude 3.8 ML, which occurred in the Horn River Basin of British Columbia, Canada12. It was felt, but 
caused no recorded damage.  An earlier review of operating experience in the NE United States13 concluded 
that such induced seismic activity is only detectable at the surface by the use of sensitive equipment and the 
magnitude can be minimised by avoiding pre-existing faults. 
In the context of the Preese Hall site, the independent review14 concluded that, with appropriate mitigation 
(which included geological surveys to characterise stresses and identify faults and use of sensitive fracture 
monitoring equipment), shale gas exploration activities could be allowed to restart. New controls based on 
expert advice15,16 to be implemented by DECC17, include the requirement for operators to:   

  Conduct a prior review of information on seismic risks and the existence of faults; 
  Submit to DECC a hydraulic fracturing plan showing how any seismic risks are to be addressed; 
  Carry out seismic monitoring before, during and after hydraulic fracturing; and 

  Implement a “traffic light” system which will be used to identify unusual seismic activity requiring 

reassessment, or halting, of operations.  In the context of the traffic lights: 
  ‘Green’ would mean magnitude of 0 ML which would mean injection could proceed as 

planned; 

  ‘Amber’ would mean a magnitude of between 0 to 0.5 ML would mean that injection could 

proceed with caution, possibly at reduced rates and that monitoring is intensified; and 

  ‘Red’ is defined as a magnitude 0.5 ML or higher, where injection is suspended immediately 

and the pressure of fluid in the well is also reduced immediately. 

The level of 0.5 ML is well below what could be felt at the surface.  For comparison, it is within the range of 
normal background noise caused by vehicles, trains and farming activities.  However, it is above the level 
expected from normal fracking operations and so serves as early warning of the possibility of larger tremors.   
For the first few operations, DECC will also have an independent expert on site to observe the operator’s 
conformance to the protocols established by DECC and to monitor the operator’s interpretation of data.  This 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
published online November 11, 2014, doi:10.1144/qjegh2014-011).  Available from 
http://qjegh.geoscienceworld.org/content/early/2014/10/29/qjegh2014-011.full.pdf+html [Accessed April 2015]. 
12 Durham Energy Institute (2013).  
13 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011), “Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs,” Revised Draft, September 2011  p.6-321.  Available from 
http://www.dec.ny.gov/docs/materials_minerals_pdf/rdsgeisch6b0911.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
14 Westaway R. & Younger P. (2014). 
15  The  Royal  Society  &  The  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering  (2012)  Shale  gas  extraction  in  the  UK:  a  review  of  hydraulic  fracturing.  
Available from http://www.raeng.org.uk/publications/reports/shale-gas-extraction-in-the-uk [Accessed April 2015]. 
16  See also House of Commons (2013) Shale Gas and Fracking standard note.  Available from 
http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/research/briefing-papers/SN06073/shale-gas-and-fracking [Accessed April 2015]. 
17  DECC (2014) Fracking UK Shale: Understanding Earthquake Risk.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/283837/Seismic_v3.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.6 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

will enable any lessons learned to be put into effect.  These revised requirements have prompted the 
specification of detailed protocols for submission with Environmental Statements18.  The Environmental 
Statement accompanying an application for exploration in Lancashire UK19, for example, includes a review of 
issues and responses to induced seismicity associated with fracturing activity to determine the viability of 
production.     
There is the potential for construction activities and drilling to cause disturbance to contaminated sites which 
could result in pollution pathways being created or re-opened for existing ground contamination.  However, 
the risk of any such effect occurring cannot be fully established until such time that sites have been 
identified.  Further, it is anticipated that ground contamination surveys would be undertaken prior to 
development in order to identify the potential risk of disturbance and appropriate mitigation, in accordance 
with the Contaminated Land Regulations and taking into account appropriate guidance.  There is also a 
small risk of land contamination from, for example, accidental spillage including of fracturing fluid or from well 
blow outs.  However, an expert review20 of hydraulic fracturing highlights that the impact of spills could be 
mitigated using established best practices such as bunding and use of non-hazardous chemicals whilst the 
probability of well failure is low.  The issue is expanded on in Appendix B3: Water.   
Like conventional oil and gas exploration, a potential source of soil and land contamination is likely to be 
drilling wastes, although the volume of arisings from unconventional oil and gas drilling activities (and, 
therefore, the risk of contamination) would be likely to be greater, commensurate with increased well depth.  
In England, drilling wastes are  covered under section 1, ‘wastes resulting from exploration, mining, 
quarrying, and physical and chemical treatment of minerals’ in schedule 1 of the List of Wastes (England) 
Regulations 2005, implemented following the adoption of the Waste Directive (67/548/EEC) and after the List 
of Wastes Decision (2000/532/EC).  Those wastes in the list relevant to drill cuttings and which are 
considered hazardous include: 

  Oil-containing drilling muds and wastes (waste: 01 05 05); and 
  Drilling muds and other drilling wastes containing dangerous substances (waste: 01 05 06). 

Drilling muds and cuttings are the by-product of well drilling, and consist of a mixture of rock fragments and 
muds which may be oil or water-based.  The latter usually contains biodegradable compounds whereas the 
former may contain compounds which resist degradation and would result in contamination if not 
appropriately managed (i.e. are hazardous wastes).  Cuttings may be moved offsite and disposed of at a 
licensed landfill site or disposed of onsite if appropriate.  The Environmental Protection (Duty of Care) 
Regulations will require operators to take suitable steps to manage such waste and provide appropriate 
information to any third party operator who may transport and/or dispose of the material elsewhere.  In 
England, the requirements of the Landfill Regulations 2002 (and subsequent amendments) will need to be 
met, including the waste acceptance criteria, and under the Water Framework Directive it would also need to 
be demonstrated that water resources could not be contaminated by disposal of mud and cuttings.  
Regulatory controls under existing legislation will therefore effectively minimise and mitigate potential effects.  

Like any large development, pad construction and associated land take could affect both existing land uses 
on site (e.g. agriculture) and those adjacent/in close proximity, particularly where they are sensitive to 
construction activity (e.g. residential areas).  Works may also have a positive effect on this aspect of the 
objective where development utilises previously developed land.  At this stage it is not known whether 
development would take place on previously developed or greenfield land nor what land uses may be 
affected.  Further, it is anticipated that sites would be restored following either completion of exploration 
drilling or decommissioning of wells such that any adverse effects would be reduced in longer term (i.e. 
following exploratory drilling or beyond the site restoration stage, depending on whether a site is taken 
forward to the production stage). 
Overall, it is considered that Stage 2 of the oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle carries moderate 
impacts, although cumulatively these could be high. This principally reflects the likelihood that there would be 

                                                            
18 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.332.    
19 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014). 
20 The Royal Society & The Royal Academy of Engineering (2012).  

   

April 2015 

  B2.7 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

some (albeit small scale) loss of greenfield land associated with pad preparation and the assumption that, 
under normal operating conditions, the risk of land contamination would be low. 

Production Development 
The range and type of effects associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under Stage 2.  The area of land take required per 
well pad would be greater than that associated with the exploratory drilling stage reflecting the need for 
additional infrastructure such as storage tanks and on-site pipelines.  During this stage, land take would 
equate to around 3ha (which compares to 1.9ha per pad for conventional drilling) with potentially further 
land-take required for pipework.  Research from the United States of America21 suggests that the indirect 
effects of well-pad establishment extend to an additional 2.4ha for every hectare of well pad area, or an 
additional 9ha per well pad. 

Where initial exploration drilling has been successful, multi-well pads are now widely used, where 6-10 wells 
are accommodated on a single pad enabling a single multistage horizontal well pad to access approximately 
250 hectares of shale gas play, compared to approximately 15 hectares for a vertical well pad.  Assuming 3 
hectares per multi-well pad, this suggests that approximately 1.2% of the land above a productive shale gas 
reservoir may need to be used to fully exploit the reservoir, or more if other indirect land-uses (e.g. central 
storage facilities and pipelines) are taken into account22. 
Additional land take may also be required for road connections and the installation of pipelines required to 
transfer gas to the existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure or to a gas compressor facility.  Works are 
likely to require further clearance of vegetation and loss of soil layers and compaction which may have a 
negative effect in terms of soil function and processes.   
Additionally, following the completion of Stage 3, some land associated with development of the well pad and 
associated infrastructure (e.g. pipelines) may be returned to its previous use.  Where development is located 
on land that is of high agricultural quality, or in other sensitive areas, effects could be more significant and 
permanent particularly if the nature of the sensitive area inhibits restoration.   

During Stage 3 there would be a need for further hydraulic fracturing to stimulate the production of gas.  As 
highlighted under the assessment of Stage 2, this process has the potential to cause induced seismicity 
although independent reviews23 suggest that the risk of hydraulic fracturing causing felt seismicity (M>3) is 
very small.    
As under Stage 2, well pad construction and associated land take could affect both existing land uses on site 
(e.g. agriculture) and those adjacent/in close proximity, particularly where they are sensitive to construction 
activity (e.g. residential areas).  Works may also have a positive effect where development utilises previously 
developed land.  Further, it is anticipated that sites would be restored following the decommissioning of wells 
such that any adverse effects would be reduced in longer term.   
Overall, it is considered that Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle 
would have minor negative effects.  As with Stage 2, this principally reflects the likelihood that there would be 
some loss of greenfield land associated with pad preparation and the assumption that, under normal 
operating conditions, the risk of land contamination would be low. 

Production/operation/maintenance 
It is assumed that no additional land take would be required during the production, operation and 
maintenance stage and in consequence, associated effects on soils would be negligible.   
During production, an operator may choose to re-fracture a well in order to increase the rate of gas 
production, if this is considered worthwhile from a commercial perspective24.  Wells are likely to be re-
                                                            
21 See Nature Conservancy (2011) Pennsylvania Energy Impacts Assessment Report 1: Marcellus Shale Natural Gas and Wind, 
available via http://www.nature.org/media/pa/pa_energy_assessment_report.pdf  p.18 reported in AEA (2012) p.32/33. 
22 AEA (2012) p.31. 
23 See footnotes 10, 11 and 14 above. 
24 Jacobs, T. (2014) Renewing Mature Shale Wells Through Refracturing.  Available from http://interraenergy.com/renewing-mature-
shale-wells-through-refracturing/ [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.8 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

fractured infrequently (either once every five to 10 years or not at all, based on US experience25).  For 
example, “wells in the Barnett Shale in the US typically benefit from refracturing within five years of 
completion though this figure can vary depending on the circumstances.  At present, there is little refracturing 
activity in the Marcellus Shale. A lifetime of up to 40 years suggests that wells may be refractured between 
zero and four times during their operational lifetime.”26 
However, a recent study from the United States27 suggests that refracturing periods could be shortening in 
response to rising prices of oil and gas and the attendant desire to maximise production: “Operators are 
increasingly refracturing two to four years later to stimulate oil and gas production. Refracturing of 15 oil 
wells in the Bakken Shale yielded a 30% increase in estimated ultimate recovery. In the Barnett Shale, 
where natural gas production declines 3- to 5-fold within a few years, refracturing increased estimated 
ultimate recovery by 20%. As the price for oil or natural gas rises, refracturing will become increasingly 
common.” 
There is a small risk of land contamination from, for example, accidental spillage including of fracturing fluid 
or from well blow outs. However, as noted under Stages 2 and 3, the impact of spills could be mitigated 
using established best practices such as bunding and use of non-hazardous chemicals whilst the probability 
of well failure is low28.  Further, it is expected that monitoring of potential well failure would be undertaken 
during re-fracturing with measures implemented to address any issues identified. Research29 into 
environmental pollution incidents in the NE United States found a declining rate over a three-year period.  
Between 2008 and 2011 in Pennsylvania where some 3,533 wells have been drilled from over 100 drilling 
rigs, identified that where half of all wells involved some level of environmental pollution, this had declined to 
one fifth by 2011.  Of 845 incidents that caused measurable amounts of pollution, 820 (97%) were classified 
as non-major and 25 (0.3%) involved major impacts to air, water and land resources.  Of all the pollution 
events, 38.8% involved site restoration, 30.5% spills contaminating water, 17.6% non-major land spills and 
10.1% involved cement and casing problems.  Of these incidents, some 3% created major problems for the 
environment, 1.1% from major land spills, and 0.9% involving major water contamination, 0.5% from blow-
outs and venting, 0.2% involving major site restoration problems and 0.2% from gas migration. 

As there would be no additional land take associated with this stage of the unconventional oil and gas 
exploration and production lifecycle, it is anticipated that any effects on land use would be very minor and 
limited to disturbance to those uses that are in close proximity to well pad sites and potentially sensitive to 
impacts arising from operational activities (e.g. emissions to air, noise and vibration).   
Based on the assumption that there would be no additional land take during Stage 4 and that the risk of 
induced seismicity and land contamination from operational activities would be low, this stage has been 
assessed as having neutral effects on land use, geology and soils. 

Decommissioning of wells 
The range and type effects associated with Stage 5 of the unconventional oil and gas production lifecycle are 
likely to be similar to those identified under conventional oil and gas production for this stage.  
Decommissioning will require additional machinery, and potentially, construction compounds to facilitate the 
removal of site equipment.  Associated works may require clearance of vegetation and loss of soil layers and 
compaction, potentially generating a negative effect in terms of soil function and processes.  However, it is 
not expected that the area of land required to undertake decommissioning activities (beyond existing well 
pads) would be significant.  In this respect, the AEA (2012:69) report for the European Commission states 
that the consequences for landtake would be “comparable with many other industrial and commercial land-
                                                            
25 Ricardo-AEA (2013) Unconventional Gas in England: Description of infrastructure and future scenarios p.17.  Available from 
http://www.ricardo-aea.com/cms/assets/Uploads/Misc-uploads/ED58661-scenarios030214v14.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
26 Ricardo-AEA (2013) pp.17/18.  
27 Jackson R. et al (2014) The Environmental Costs and Benefits of Fracking  p.332 in: Annual Review of Environmental Resources 
2014   39:327–62.  Available from  http://sites.biology.duke.edu/jackson/arer2014.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
28 The Royal Society & The Royal Academy of Engineering (2012). 
29 Considine T. et al (2012) Environmental Impacts during Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, Impacts and Remedies. Shale 
Resources and Society Institute p.19/p.30.  Available from 
http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.9 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

uses, and are of no more than minor significance”.  However, where development associated with 
decommissioning activities is located on land that is of high agricultural quality or in other sensitive areas, 
effects could be more significant and permanent particularly if the nature of the sensitive area inhibits full site 
restoration. 
As with pad preparation (Stages 2 and 3), decommissioning may affect land stability, geomorphology and/or 
soil erosion rates, on- or off-site.  The type/magnitude of the effects will depend on the geology and physical 
nature of the area and effects may be particularly adverse where activities are undertaken within on in close 
proximity to sensitive areas such as Geological Conservation Review sites in the UK.  However, it is 
considered reasonable to assume that the risk of potential impacts on geologically sensitive sites/areas 
would be fully considered as part of the planning application process and in accordance with national 
planning policy and guidance.  Further, the potential for significant negative effects would be identified as 
part of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process (where appropriate). 
There is the potential for the construction of buildings and infrastructure associated with decommissioning to 
cause disturbance to contaminated land where this development takes place on an existing contaminated 
site.  However, the risk of any such effect occurring cannot be fully established until such time that sites have 
been identified.  Further, it is anticipated that ground contamination surveys would be undertaken prior to 
decommissioning in order to identify the potential risk of disturbance and appropriate mitigation, in 
accordance with the Contaminated Land Regulations and taking into account appropriate guidance.   

During the decommissioning stage, there continues to be a small risk of land contamination from, for 
example, accidental spillage.  However, it would be expected that any potential contamination would be 
sufficiently mitigated by following best practice guidance and through the use of a Construction 
Environmental Management Plan (CEMP).  It should also be noted that the decommissioning of onshore 
wells and associated installations would be addressed through conditions in planning consents and through 
PPC authorisation, which requires that the site of an installation be returned to a satisfactory state on 
closure.  Within the UK, permission to decommission onshore wells is also required from DECC under The 
Petroleum (Production) (Landward Areas) Regulations 1995 and would require submission and agreement in 
advance of a Cessation of Production (COP) report. 
Decommissioning activities and associated land take (beyond the existing well pad) could affect both existing 
land uses on decommissioning development sites (e.g. agriculture) and those adjacent/in close proximity, 
particularly where they are sensitive to decommissioning activity (e.g. residential areas).  However, 
disruption would be temporary (i.e. for the duration of decommissioning) with land expected to be restored 
on completion.   

Site restoration and relinquishment 
For the purposes of this assessment it is assumed that all production facilities, infrastructure and 
hardstanding would be removed during the site restoration and relinquishment stage.  Due to the need for 
invasive demolition techniques and land excavation there is the potential for adverse effects on land stability, 
geomorphology and/or soil erosion during this stage.  Notwithstanding, it is anticipated that effects would be 
similar to site restoration associated with other forms of mineral extraction and would be unlikely to be 
significant. 
It is expected that during site restoration work, land would be remediated and wells sealed thereby mitigating 
the potential long term risk of land contamination.   
Long term effects (i.e. beyond site restoration) on land use, geology and soils associated with the 
decommissioning phase will depend largely on the end use of well pad sites and future soil quality (this 
would be determined on a site-by-site basis following discussions between the operator and the minerals 
planning authority, or equivalent).  Within the England, paragraph 143 of the National Planning Policy 
Framework (DCLG 2012) promotes high quality restoration and aftercare “including for agriculture 
(safeguarding the long term potential of best and most versatile agricultural land and conserving soil 
resources), geodiversity, biodiversity, native woodland, the historic environment and recreation”.  It is 
expected that this stage of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle would have a 
positive effect on this objective by restoring, and potentially enhancing, soil quality and prospects for 
beneficial land use.   

   

April 2015 

  B2.10 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

It should be noted that the AEA (2012) report highlights that it may not be possible to return entire sites to 
beneficial use due to, for example, concerns regarding public safety.  The report states (at page 69) that over 
a wider area “this could result in a significant loss of land, and/or fragmentation of land area such as an 
amenity or recreational facility, valuable farmland, or valuable natural habitat”.  This is considered further in 
respect of both low and high activity scenarios below.  

2.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  Sites selected should be of low agricultural/geological value. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
Potential measures for consideration include30: 

  Using larger drilling pads for multiple wells, increasing the spacing between wells.  Well pad 
spacing at one pad per 5km2 instead of 1 per 2.5km2 reduces the total land disturbance from 
30ha to 22.5ha per 2,500ha area. 

  Site selection including in respect of access and avoidance of sensitive areas such as areas of 

high agricultural land value. 

  Limiting the use of impoundments in favour of tanks. 

  Erosion and run-off control using measures such as soil stabilisation, terracing, and sediment 

traps. 

  Land restoration to an appropriate after-use. 

Where necessary, sites should be carefully stripped of topsoils prior to construction works commencing to 
avoid damage.  All soils should be handled in suitable conditions (e.g. dry weather) and the most appropriate 
method of soil handling should be used.  Soils should be stored in allocated heaps and protected from 
erosion, contamination or degradation.  Different soil types should be stored separately and the length of 
time soils are stored should be minimised where possible.  Soil excavation and mounds should avoid 
compaction where possible by making use of appropriate wide tracked vehicles and avoiding working on soil 
when it is wet.  Appropriate drainage systems should be utilised on site to reduce soil erosion. 

Appropriate waste disposal should be undertaken to avoid potential local contamination (see also Waste 
topic) relating to likely sources such as31: 

  Drilling mud and drill cuttings located in mud tanks; 
  Sanitary waste collected in a sealed cess tank; 

  Site drainage collect in ditches; 
  General waster (paper, timber, scrap metal) collected in skips; 
  Waste fluids collected in storage tanks and collected by licensed operators and disposed of at 

authorised locations.  

Where possible, development should make best use of previously developed land. 

                                                            
30 AEA (2012) Section 5.4. 
31 Cuadrilla Resources Ltd (2010) Supporting Statement to the Planning Application for the Becconsall Hydrocarbon Exploration Site 
p.14.  Available from http://planningregister.lancashire.gov.uk/Attachments/5520/Becconsall%202%20-
%20Supporting%20Statement.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.11 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Careful consideration should be given during the site selection process to the avoidance of adverse impacts 
on sensitive land uses that may be affected by construction activity and drilling. 
In respect of reducing the risks of induced seismicity, potential mitigation embedded as part of project 
proposals include32,33: 

  Reviewing available information on geology, structure (including faults) and in situ stresses in 

the vicinity of the proposed site to avoid hydraulically fracturing into, or close to, existing 
critically stressed faults: 

  Competent authorities compile regional maps of underground resources. 
  Conduct 3D seismic survey to identify faults and fractures. 
  Sharing of information to ensure that all operators in a gas play are aware of risks and can 

therefore plan. 

  Establish national capability to address groundwater contamination arising from 

unconventional gas operations.  In the case of transboundary aquifers, joint capability 
established. 

  Engagement with third parties (e.g. regulators, other operators, researchers) to ensure fully 

aware of any issues/proximity (e.g. to other underground activities). 

  Search for and document potential leakage pathways (e.g. other wells, faults, mines). 

  Carry out risk based geomechanical assessments of proposed hydraulic fracturing with regard 

to faults (including maximum magnitude estimates): 
  Development of a conceptual model of the zone before work commences covering geology, 

groundwater flows, pathways, microseismicity and subsequent updating of the model as 
information becomes available; 

  Modelling of fracturing programme to predict extent of fracture growth based on best 

information; 

  Ground motion prediction models to assess the potential impact of induced earthquakes. 
  Revise geological, hydrogeological and seismic conceptual model using geomechanical 

information on fractures, stress, rock strength, in situ fluid pressures through wireline 
monitoring and/or through new cores and stratigraphic tests; 

  Undertake complex modelling of fluid flows and migration (reservoir simulations); 

  Identify potential seismic receptors within a defined radius of the well site (5km) including: wells, 

infrastructure, special buildings, residential buildings and industrial/commercial buildings; and 

  Monitoring background induced and natural seismicity before, during and after hydraulic 

fracturing: 
  Monitoring and control during operations to ensure hydraulic fractures/pollutants do not 

extend beyond the gas-producing formations and does not result in seismic events or 
damage to buildings/installations that could be the result of fracturing; and 

  Establish the presence of methane in groundwater, including drinking water through 

sampling of shallow groundwater during wet and dry periods and/or borehole to sample deep 
groundwater and characterise the hydrological series.  

  Monitor the extent of fracture growth during hydraulic fracturing using a buried microseismic 

array; and 

                                                            
32 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp.344/345 . 
33 European Commission (2014) Technical support for assessing the need for a risk management framework for unconventional gas 
extraction.  Available from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/risk_mgmt_fwk.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B2.12 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Implementation of the Traffic Light System (via the surface seismic monitoring array). 

Production Development 
As previous, but also including: 

  Where possible, well pad infrastructure and associated development that is no longer required 

should be removed as soon as is reasonably practicable with land restored; and 

  Pipelines should be buried where possible with land restored following installation. 

Production/operation/maintenance  
As previous. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  Sites selected to accommodate development associated with decommissioning activities should 

be of low agricultural/geological value. 

  Where necessary, sites should be carefully stripped of topsoils prior to construction works 
commencing to avoid damage.  All soils should be handled in suitable conditions (e.g. dry 
weather) and the most appropriate method of soil handling should be used.  Soils should be 
stored in allocated heaps and protected from erosion, contamination or degradation.  Different 
soil types should be stored separately and the length of time soils are stored should be 
minimised where possible.  Soil excavation and mounds should avoid compaction where 
possible by making use of appropriate wide tracked vehicles and avoiding working on soil when 
it is wet.  Appropriate drainage systems should be utilised on site to reduce soil erosion. 

  Where possible, development should make best use of previously developed land. 

  Careful consideration should be given during the site selection process to the avoidance of 
adverse impacts on sensitive land uses that may be affected by decommissioning activity. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 
None identified.  

2.4  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The European Thematic Strategy on Soil Protection (2006) sets out the European Commission’s strategy 
on soils and includes a proposal for an EU wide Soils Directive.  The overall objective of the strategy is the 
protection and sustainable use of soil, based on the following guiding principles: 

  Preventing further soil degradation and preserving its functions; 
  When soil is used and its functions are exploited, action has to be taken on soil use and 

management patterns; 

  When soil acts as a sink/receptor of the effects of human activities or environmental 

phenomena, action has to be taken at source; and 

  Restoring degraded soils to a level of functionality consistent at least with current and intended 

use, thus also considering the cost implications of the restoration of soil. 

The EU Integrated Pollution, Prevention and Control (IPPC) Directive 2008/1/EC defines the obligations 
to which industrial and agricultural activities with a high pollution potential must comply, through a single 
permitting process.  It sets minimum requirements to be included in all permits, particularly in terms of 

   

April 2015 

  B2.13 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

pollutants released.  The aim of the Directive is to prevent or reduce pollution being released to the 
atmosphere, water and soil, as well as reducing the quantities of waste arising from industry and agriculture.  
In order to gain an IPPC permit, operators must demonstrate that they have systematically developed 
proposals to apply the ‘Best Available Techniques’ (BAT) to pollution prevention and control and that they 
address other requirements relevant to local factors. 
The European Commission reviewed European legislation on industrial emissions in order to ensure clearer 
environmental benefits, remove ambiguities, promotes cost-effectiveness and to encourage technological 
innovation.  The review led to the commission proposing and adopting a recast Directive on Industrial 
Emissions (IED) 2010/75/EU which came into force on 06 January 2011.  
A number of other European Directives contribute indirectly to soil protection including on Habitats 
92/43/EEC, Air 2008/50/EC, Water 2000/60/EC and Nitrates 91/676/EEC. 
The World Summit on Sustainable Development (2002) in Johannesburg proposed broad-scale principles 
which should underlie sustainable development and growth including an objective on greater resource 
efficiency.  Reusing previously developed land is a good example of resource efficiency of land.   
The conservation of resources is one of the underlying objectives of the European Spatial Development 
Perspective (ESDP) (1999) the framework for policy guidance to improve cooperation among community 
sectoral policies.  There also exists a range of legislation in relation to resources. 

UK 
The Environmental Protection Act 1990 defines within England, Scotland and Wales the legal framework 
for duty of care for waste, contaminated land and statutory nuisance.   
The Environment Act 1995 seeks to protect and preserve the environment and guard against pollution to 
air, land or water.  The Act adopts an integrated approach to environmental protection and outlines where 
authorisation is required from relevant authorities to carry out certain procedures as well as outlining the 
responsibilities of the relevant authorities.  The Act also amends the Environmental Protection Act 1990 with 
regard compulsory remediation of contaminated land.  The Environmental Protection Act 1990 was also 
modified in 2006 to cover radioactivity, and then a further modification was made in 2007 to cover land 
contaminated with radioactivity originating from nuclear installations.   
The Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 allows the designation of SSSIs for sites with geological 
importance.   
The Environmental Permitting Regulations (England and Wales) (2010) consolidates a range of previous 
permits required for processes which might cause pollution.  It covers water discharges, groundwater 
activities, radioactive substances, waste, mining and installations.  It requires operators to obtain permits for 
some facilities, to register others as exempt and provides for ongoing supervision by regulators.  The aim of 
the Regime is to: 

  Protect the environment so that statutory and Government policy environmental targets and 

outcomes are achieved; 

  Deliver permitting and compliance with permits and certain environmental targets effectively and 

efficiently in a way that provides increased clarity and minimises the administrative burden on 
both the regulator and the operators; 

  Encourage regulators to promote best practice in the operation of facilities; and 
  Continue to fully implement European legislation. 

The Pollution Prevention and Control (England and Wales) Regulations 2000 permit and regulate many 
industrial activities that may pollute our environment.   
The Overarching National Policy Statement (NPS) for Energy (EN-1) sets out the Government’s policy 
against which proposals for major energy projects will be assessed and decided on by the National 
Infrastructure Directorate (NID) within the Planning Inspectorate.  The NPS identifies a range of generic 
impacts that may arise from energy development and associated policy including geological conservation 

   

April 2015 

  B2.14 
                      
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

and land use.  The National Policy Statement for Gas Supply Infrastructure and Gas and Oil Pipelines 
(EN-4) provides the primary basis for decisions on applications for gas supply infrastructure and gas and oil 
pipelines considered to be nationally significant in England and Wales. 

England 
In June 2011, the Government outlined its vision for England’s soils in the Natural Environment White 
Paper (NEWP).  This set a clear target that by 2030 all of England’s soils will be managed sustainably and 
degradation threats tackled successfully, in order to improve the quality of soil and to safeguard its ability to 
provide essential ecosystem services and functions for future generations.  As part of this vision, the 
Government committed to undertaking further research to explore how soil degradation can affect the soil’s 
ability to support vital ecosystem services; and how best to manage lowland peatlands in a way that supports 
efforts to tackle climate change.  This will inform our future policies and the direction of future action towards 
2030. 
The Contaminated Land (England) Regulations 2006 sets out provisions relating to the identification and 
remediation of contaminated land.  The Environmental Damage (Prevention and Remediation) 
Regulations 2009 require action in response to the most significant cases of environmental damage 
including in respect of risks to human health from contamination of land. 
The Government has reviewed the contaminated land regime in England for the first time since its 
introduction in 2000.  Following the review, revised Statutory Guidance has now been issued under Part 
2A of the Environmental Protection Act 1990.  This revised Statutory Guidance while still taking a 
precautionary approach, allows regulators to make quicker decisions about whether or not land is 
contaminated under Part 2A.  It also offers better protection against potential health impacts by concentrating 
on the sites where action is actually needed. 
In 2009, Defra published Safeguarding our Soils, A Strategy for England.  The vision in this strategy is 
that by 2030, all England’s soils will be managed sustainably and degradation threats will be tackled 
successfully. The overall aspiration is that this will improve the quality of England’s soils and safeguard their 
ability to provide essential services for future generations.  
The National Planning Policy Framework (2012) (NPPF) sets out the Government’s planning policy for the 
use of land in England.  With specific regard to geology and soils, it states that “the planning system should 
contribute to, and enhance, the natural and local environment by protecting and enhancing valued 
landscapes, geological conservation interests and soils; preventing both new and existing development from 
contributing to or being put at unacceptable risk from, or being adversely affected by unacceptable levels of 
soil pollution or land instability; and remediating and mitigating despoiled, degraded, derelict, contaminated 
and unstable land, where appropriate” (paragraph 109).  Local planning authorities should take into account 
the economic and other benefits of the best and most versatile agricultural land.  Where significant 
development of agricultural land is demonstrated to be necessary, local planning authorities should seek to 
use areas of poorer quality land in preference to that of a higher quality (paragraph 112).  The NPPF also 
states that planning policies should encourage the effective use of land by reusing land that has been 
previously developed, provided that it is not of high environmental value (paragraph 111). 
Planning Practice Guidance for Onshore Oil and Gas (2013) provides advice on the planning issues 
associated with the extraction of hydrocarbons.  It will be kept under review and should be read alongside 
other planning guidance and the NPPF.  The guidance identifies a range of issues that mineral planning 
authorities may need to address.  Those particularly relevant to land use, geology and soils include:  

  Risk of contamination to land;  

  Soil resources;  
  The impact on best and most versatile agricultural land; 
  Land stability/subsidence;  

  Nationally protected geological and geomorphological sites and features; and 
  Site restoration and aftercare. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.1 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

3.  Water and Flood Risk 

3.1 

Introduction 

Water quality and resources within the context of this report are defined as inland surface freshwater and 
groundwater resources, and inland surface freshwater, groundwater, estuarine, coastal and marine water 
quality.   
There are links between the water quality/resources and flood risk topic and a number of other study topics, 
in particular the effects and interactions of water quality and resources on biodiversity, population and human 
health. 

3.2  Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on water and flood risk arising from the potential 
activities that could take place in the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production.  Table B3.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and 
decommissioning. 

Table B3.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage  

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 

  Seismic surveys; 

  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 

  Well design and construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 

  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 

  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 

  Well testing, possibly including flaring 

  Provision of pipeline connections  

  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

   

April 2015 

  B3.2 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B3.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage  

4 

Activities 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 

  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 

  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  

  Site restoration and reclamation.  

5 

6 

 

Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3. 
 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Stage 1 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle comprises of non-intrusive 
activities including site identification, site selection and the securing of regulator approval.  These activities 
would be largely desk-based and in consequence, no effects on water resources or flood risk are anticipated.  
Seismic testing would also be undertaken during this stage.  Vibroseis is one of the most commonly used 
method of seismic survey and involves the employment of large vibrator unit vehicles as well as support 
vehicles for data recording.   

Construction of temporary tracks/roads may be required to facilitate site access for vibrator unit vehicles 
(should vibroseis be undertaken).  This may lead to a loss of permeability on site and increased surface 
water runoff.  Runoff has the potential to collect and carry contaminants that may have been disposed of, or 
spilt, on access roads which could enter surface water bodies and groundwater.  Typical contaminants would 
be likely to include: oil; fuels; and lubricating fluids.  Additionally, increased runoff could result in flood risk 
offsite.  However, exploration works would be short term and temporary and the area of access track would 
be relatively small such that any increase in surface water run-off would be negligible.  It is also expected 
that any potentially significant increase in surface water runoff would be managed through standard 
construction measures (as appropriate) including, for example, the implementation of appropriate drainage 
(methods of surface water management are discussed further below) or the use of ground protection mats 
that are highly permeable and limit compaction.  Further, as this stage would not involve significant vehicle 
movements, the risk of spillages is considered to be low. 
In some cases, shot-hole survey techniques may be used.  This involves the drilling of a hole with a small 
diameter for the insertion of explosives which are then detonated with the holes infilled after use.  It is 
unlikely that shot-hole survey techniques would be carried out in close proximity to surface water bodies and 
therefore would not impact on water quality.   

   

April 2015 

  B3.3 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Overall, the potential for impacts on water quality (both surface and groundwater) and flood risk are 
considered to be negligible. In addition, no activities at this stage would be expected to result in the 
substantive consumption of water and therefore demand for water resources would be unchanged. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

Surface Water Contamination 
Pad preparation would involve the removal of vegetation and general groundworks to a site of approximately 
1 hectare (10,000 sqm).  It is likely that the well pad would be constructed from compacted aggregate laid on 
an impermeable membrane and geotextile layer.  Surface water runoff would be collected and attenuated via 
perimeter ditches.  There should be no connectivity between the runoff ditches from the well pad and any 
other surface water features adjacent to the well pad.   
During this early construction work and in particular before interceptor drains have been constructed, there is 
a risk of runoff contaminated with hydraulic oil, nutrient phosphorous, nitrogen, fuels and lubricating oils 
entering water bodies, streams and groundwater following, for example, surface spills1.  Off the pad, 
additional works including in respect of access roads and utility corridors may be required which could also 
cause runoff.  These risks are generally shared with other large greenfield construction sites and the 
magnitude of any impacts will depend on the extent of a site, existing site conditions, construction practices 
and the severity and frequency of rainfall events.  The New York State Department of Environment 
(NYSDEC in AEA, 2012) states that the larger footprint of high volume, multiple well pad installations as well 
as larger compounds associated with shale gas exploration and production increases the risk of runoff 
occurring (relative to conventional oil and gas installations) when assessed on a ‘per site’ basis.  An AEA 
(2012) report2 concerning the potential environmental and human health risks from unconventional oil and 
gas exploration and production activities, meanwhile, highlights that the increased scale of shale gas 
installations means that there is also greater potential for habitat impacts directly associated with stormwater 
runoff due to the potential for erosions of streams, sediment accumulation, water quality degradation and 
flooding. Although the likelihood of such events will depend on the extent of any connectivity between any 
stormwater runoff and receiving waters.   

Surface spills/leaks of fracturing and other fluids including, for example, drilling muds/cuttings and flowback 
water have been reported by some as posing a greater risk of surface (and groundwater) contamination than 
the process of fracturing itself3.  Sources of surface spills/leaks could include well ‘blowouts’ (any sudden 
and uncontrolled escape of fluids from a well to the surface), vehicle accidents or inadequate storage of 
hydraulic fracturing fluids and flowback water.  In this respect, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT, 2011) reviewed 43 incidents of environmental pollution related to natural gas operations including 
shale gas and identified that, alongside groundwater contamination by natural gas or drilling fluid (47% of 
total incidents), surface spills of stored hydraulic fracturing fluids and flowback water (33% of total incidents) 
are the most widely reported causes of water contamination.  Blowouts, meanwhile, represented only a small 
proportion (4%) of incidents4.  Davies et al (2014) reported5 that in the UK “between 2000 and 2013, the 
Environment Agency recorded nine pollution incidents involving the release of crude oil within 1 km of an oil 

                                                      

1 New York Department of Environment (2011) Revised Draft Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The Oil, Gas 
and Solution Mining Regulatory Program.  Available from http://www.dec.ny.gov/data/dmn/rdsgeisfull0911.pdf [Accessed June 2013].  
2 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe. Report for European Commission DG Environment.  Available from  
http://www.total.com/en/special-reports/shale-gas/environmental-challenges-201958.html [Accessed October 2014]. 
3 Groat and Grimshaw (2012) Fact-based regulation for environmental protection in shale gas development, Energy Institute, University 
of Texas: Austin. Available from:  http://cewc.colostate.edu/wp content/uploads/2012/02/ei_shale_gas_regulation120215.pdf [Accessed 
September 2013].  
4Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2011). Study on the Future of Natural Gas. Available from 
http://mitei.mit.edu/publications/reports-studies/future-natural-gas [Accessed November 2014]. 
5 Davies, R.J. Almond, S. Ward, R.S. Jackson, R.B. Adams, C. Worral, F. Herringshaw, L. Gluyas, J. Whitehead, M.A.(2014) Oil and 
gas wells and their integrity: Implications for shale and unconventional resource exploitation, Marine and Petroleum Geology.  Available 
from https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/Publishedversion.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.4 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

or gas well. The records are not clear as to whether the incidents were due to well integrity failure, problems 
with pipework linked to the well, or other non-well related issues”.  
An analysis of notices of violations (NOVs) from the Pennsylvania Marcellus Shale industry between January 
2008 and August 2011 by Considine et al (2012)6 highlights that surface spills generally did not have major 
environmental impacts as they were often small, took place on the well pad and were contained within the 
boundaries of well pad sites.  Where major environmental events occurred, the impacts were often mitigated.  
The report also highlights that water contamination events from spills that impact bodies of water directly 
were in most case minor, although they varied by the amount of fluids spilled and the sensitivity of the 
receiving environment.     
A report by Public Health England (2014) concerning the potential health impacts of shale gas extraction7 
concludes that the risk of accidents from surface activities such as the handling and processing of fracturing 
fluids can be reduced by implementing control measures and best practices, the adoption of accident 
management plans and through strict enforcement.  A review of hydraulic fracturing by the Royal Academy 
of Engineering and Royal Society (2012)8 highlights that in the UK, installing impermeable site lining is 
typically a condition of planning permissions such that surface water run-off is likely to be captured in 
drainage channels surrounding the site.  Additionally, an environmental permit is required in the UK to 
discharge contaminated surface water runoff that will only be issued if it is not feasible to stop the 
contamination at source and the contamination will not pollute the receiving water9.   

Groundwater Contamination 

Composition of Fracturing Fluid 
During hydraulic fracturing, water is injected into the well at high pressures causing fractures in the rock.  In 
order to induce and maintain permeability, and generate productive fractures, chemicals are added to the 
water to create hydraulic fracturing fluid, the composition of which is dependent on site specific conditions 
including the underlying geology7.   
Evidence from the United States (US) suggests that up to 750 chemicals were used between 2005 and 2009 
in shale gas drilling throughout the US.  Typically, fracturing fluid includes10: 

  Water: about 98-99% of total volume; 
  Proppant: about 1-1.9% of total volume, usually sand or ceramic particles; 

  Friction reducer: about 0.025% of total volume, usually polyacrylamide; and 
  Disinfectant: about 0.005% to 0.05%, usually glutaraldehyde, quaternary amine or tetrakis 

hydroxymethyl phosphonium sulphate; 

  Surfactants: 0.05-0.2%; 

  Gelation chemicals (thickeners): usually guar gum or cellulose polymers; 

                                                      

6 Considine, T. Waterson, R. Considine, N. Martin, J. (2012) Environmental Impacts During Marcellus Shale Gas Drilling: Causes, 
Impacts, and Remedies.  Available from http://cce.cornell.edu/EnergyClimateChange/NaturalGasDev/Documents/UBSRSI-
Environmental%20Impact%20Report%202012.pdf [Accessed April 2015].   
7 Public Health England (2014) Review of the Potential Health Impacts and Exposures to Chemical and Radioactive Pollutants as a 
Result of Shale Gas Extraction.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/329744/PHE-CRCE-002_for_website_protected.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015].   
8 Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing.  Available from 
https://royalsociety.org/policy/projects/shale-gas-extraction/report/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
9 Environment Agency (2013) Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance Consultation Draft.   
10 King (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101. Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34-42.  Available from 
http://fracfocus.org/sites/default/files/publications/hydraulic_fracturing_101.pdf [Accessed April 2015].  

   

April 2015 

  B3.5 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Scale inhibitors: phosphate esters or phosphonates; 
  Hydrochloric acid may be used in some cases to reduce fracture initiation pressure; and 
  Corrosion inhibitor, used at 0.2% to 0.5% of acid volumes, and only used if acid is used. 

In the UK, Cuadrilla has released details of the composition of fracturing fluid used in hydraulic fracturing at 
Preese Hall, Lancashire11.  Results from the Preese Hall-1 Well show that over six fracturing episodes, the 
following volumes of substances were used as fracturing fluid: 

  8,399m3 of fresh water (sourced from the region’s water supply company, United Utilities); 
  462 metric tons of sand (sourced from Sibelo UK); 
  3.7m3of friction reducer (polyacrylamide emulsion in hydrocarbon oil); and 

  4,252 grams of chemical tracer (consisting of water and sodium salt). 

The composition of chemical additives used in fracturing fluids and the disclosure of this information by 
operators has been a particularly controversial issue in the US.  When a Congressional Committee launched 
an investigation into products used between 2005 and 2009, it found the use of toxic and carcinogenic 
substances, such as benzene and lead12.  However, it is understood that some US states have adopted 
disclosure regulations for chemicals added to fracturing liquids, as well as there being Federal interest in this 
issue13.  

In the UK, operators are required to disclose the full details of chemicals to be used during the fracturing 
process to the relevant regulator, including a brief description of the chemical’s purpose and any hazards it 
may pose to the environment (subject to appropriate protection for commercial sensitivity).  Under United 
Kingdom Onshore Oil and Gas (UKOOG) guidelines14 operators are also expected to disclose all chemicals 
by name, volume and concentration on their website and assess the potential risks from the use of fracturing 
fluids and additives and create risk management plans (fracturing programmes) to effectively manage the 
additives and make the process used to develop specific plans available for public disclosure. The regulator 
will then also assess whether an additive is hazardous (i.e. substances or groups of substances that are 
toxic, persistent and liable to bioaccumulate, and other substances or groups of substances which give rise 
to an equivalent level of concern, reflecting the definition set out in the Water Framework Directive) or a non-
hazardous pollutant using a methodology that follows the requirements of the Groundwater Daughter 
Directive and under technical guidance, according to the specific site and local hydrogeological conditions15.  
Allowing the use of a chemical at one site does not automatically mean that it will be permitted for use 
elsewhere as the environmental risks may be different, for example, due to local geological conditions.  An 
example of the implementation of this regulation in England includes a proposed site at Balcombe, Sussex 
where, following the submission of a list of chemicals for use during fracturing, the regulator (the 
Environment Agency) prevented the operator (Cuadrilla) from using antimony trioxide due to its potential to 
contaminate groundwater16.     

                                                      

11 Cuadrilla (2013) Composition of Components in Bowland Shale Fracturing Fluid for Preese Hall-1 Well.  Available from 
http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/what-we-do/hydraulic-fracturing/fracturing-fluid/ [Accessed October 2014]. 
12 US House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce in CIWEM (2014) Shale Gas and Water: An independent review 
of shale gas exploration and exploitation in the UK with a particular focus on the implications for the water environment.  Available from 
http://www.ciwem.org/policy-and-international/current-topics/energy.aspx [Accessed April 2015]. 
13 SEAB (2011) in AEA (2012). 
14 UKOOG (2013) UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines: Exploration and appraisal phase.  Available from 
http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelines.pdf [Accessed November 2014]. 
15 SEPA, NIEA, NRW and EA (2013) Technical Guidance WM2: Hazardous waste Interpretation of the definition and classification of 
hazardous waste (3rd Edition 2013).  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/369810/LIT_5426_WM2.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
16 The Guardian (2013) Fracking firm was barred from using chemical, Balcombe meeting told.  10 October 2013.  Available from 
http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/10/fracking-chemical-balcombe-meeting [Accessed November 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.6 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

A review of research has identified that the main risk of groundwater contamination is commonly considered 
to be the leakage of fracturing fluid as a result of inadequacies in well cementing or due to the movement of 
contaminants through existing faults or porous rocks to groundwater resources.  In addition, other 
substances (trace elements, NORM and organic material) may be contained in flowback water which, if not 
controlled, could cause contamination.  These risks are considered in-turn below.     

Well Integrity 
The causes of groundwater contamination associated with well design, drilling, casing and cementing 
generally relate to the quality of the well structure.17 ‘Well integrity’ refers to preventing hydrocarbons from 
leaking out of the well by isolating it from other subsurface formations.  The Royal Academy of Engineering 
and Royal Society (2012)18 note that well failure may arise from poor well integrity resulting from: 

  Subsurface blowout: which can occur during the original drilling of a well, during the hydraulic 

fracturing process or as a result of the fracturing of adjacent wells; 

  Annular leak: poor cementation allows contaminants to move vertically through the well either 

between casings or between casings and rock formations; and 

  Radial leak: casing failure allows fluid to move horizontally out of the well and migrate into the 

surrounding rock formations. 

Blowout events are uncontrolled in nature and are therefore innately dangerous6. An investigation by the 
United States Environment Protection Agency (US EPA, 2012) identified ‘blowouts’ to be one of the main 
causes of pollution incidents (alongside surface spills)19, although research by the MIT (2011) and Considine 
et al (2012) indicates that blowouts represent only a small proportion of incidents.  In this respect, The Royal 
Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) highlight that blowouts are rare and that whilst some 
shales can be over-pressurised, blowout is unlikely because shale has very low permeability. 
Contamination and migration of methane into aquifers due to unsatisfactory cementing of wells has also 
been reported20.  For example, a US EPA21 investigation into groundwater water quality complaints in 
Pavillion, Wyoming where hydraulic fracturing occurred at depths as shallow as 372 m below ground surface 
found that the observed contamination was linked to inadequate vertical well casing lengths and a lack of 
well integrity.  The MIT (2011) review found that almost 50% of the 43 incidents of environmental pollution 
related to natural gas operations (including shale) reviewed as part of the study were related to the 
contamination of groundwater as a result of drilling operations. The most common cause of such 
contamination appeared to be inadequate cementing or casing into wellbores, allowing natural gas to 
migrate into groundwater zones as it was extracted4.  
The risk of contamination associated with blowouts can be reduced through the installation of a blowout 
preventer during drilling to automatically shut down fluid flow in the wellbore should there be any sudden or 
uncontrolled escape of fluids.  However, there have been reports of blowout preventer (and wellhead) failure.  
For example, a well in North Dakota lost control after a blowout preventer failed, leaking between 50 and 70 
barrels (2,100 to 2,940 gallons) per day of hydraulic fracturing fluid and 200 barrels (8,400 gallons) per day 
of oil22.     

Measures to address the risk of well failure, meanwhile, include:   
                                                      

17 AEA (2012). 
18 Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012). 
19 US EPA (2012) Study of the Potential Impacts of Hydraulic Fracturing on Drinking Water Resources. Progress Report, December 
2012. Available from http://www2.epa.gov/sites/production/files/documents/hf-report20121214.pdf [Accessed November 2014]. 
20 Secretary of Energy Advisory Board (2011a) Shale gas production sub-committee: 90 day report, Report to US Department of Energy, 
18 August 2011.  Available from http://www.shalegas.energy.gov/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
21 US EPA (2011c) Investigation of Ground Contamination near Pavillion, Wyoming: DRAFT.  Available from http://www.epa.gov/ord 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
22  Atkin,  E.  (2014)  Fracking  Well  Blowout  Causes  Oil  And  Chemical  Wastewater  Spill  In  North  Dakota  (Updated).    Available  from 
http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2014/02/17/3299221/north-dakota-blowout/ [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.7 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Prior to the installation of casings, wellbore testing to establish the presence of naturally 

occurring (gamma) radiation, measure the density and porosity of the formation and measure 
the diameter of the wellbore so that casings are installed accurately; 

  Testing of cement prior to use to ensure that the properties meet the requirements of well 

design; 

  Installation of a cement bond log to test the equality of the cement bond between casings and 

formations.  If any casings do not meet specifications then remedial works can then be 
undertaken;  

  Pressure testing of well casing to ensure the mechanical integrity and strength prior to further 

drilling; and 

  Formation pressure testing following drilling.23  

The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) highlight that despite the implementation of 
cementation testing, wells can still leak over time due to cement shrinkage.  Their report points to research 
on best practice for well construction in the US which has identified that factors affecting leakage include the 
number of well casings and the extent to which these are cemented.  Cement needs to completely surround 
casings to provide a continuous annular seal between casings and the rock formation, as well as between 
casings.  In terms of the UK, the report notes that it is standard practice to have three strings of casing with 
at least two (intermediate and production casing) passing through and thereby isolating any freshwater 
zones.  It is also best practice in the UK to cement casings to the surface.  Cement bond logs (CBL’s) can be 
used to test the quality of cement bond between casings and formation before subsequent sections are 
drilled.  Casings can be similarly tested and repaired following each fracturing stage. Well integrity is inferred 
during operations by annular pressures, as well as testing seals and valves at casing joints.  Additionally, the 
use of monitoring wells and the sampling of near surface aquifers to detect methane can indicate 
groundwater (and surface water) contamination and monitor well integrity.  Tracers (usually synthetic organic 
compounds) can also be added to fracturing fluid and used to detect water contamination, although the 
proprietary nature of these chemicals, combined with their instability in the environment, limits their 
usefulness24.  However, a range of new technologies are being developed in this field in order to enhance 
the detection of fracturing fluids including, for example, inert DNA-based tracers, nanoparticles and 
geochemical tracers25.   

The regulatory framework can also provide an important role in ensuring well integrity.  In England, a range 
of regulatory measures and guidance are in place to reduce the risk of well failure affecting groundwater 
quality.  The Environment Agency requires the adoption of good practice in groundwater protection, and the 
delineation of groundwater including any local aquifers as part of the well design and fracturing risk 
assessment process.  The Offshore Installations and Wells (Design and Construction, etc) Regulations 1996, 
meanwhile, ensure that the Health and Safety Executive have to be notified of all drilling operations for oil or 
gas, and have an opportunity to scrutinise the well design and operational plan before exploration activities 
begin.  The regulations specify that operators should ensure that there can be no unplanned escape of fluids 
from the well and require wells to be examined by an ‘independent and competent person ‘(‘well examiner’).  
The examiner can request the results of any well integrity tests and raise any health and safety concerns 
with the operator, although there is currently no legislative requirement for well integrity testing to be 
undertaken in the UK.  These requirements have been reinforced by an amendment to the Petroleum Act 
1998, required by Section 50 of the Infrastructure Act 2015 that requires appropriate arrangements to have 
been made for the independent inspection of the integrity of the relevant well. 
Evidence that is cited that 
appropriate arrangements have been made includes a certificate given by the Health and Safety Executive 
that it: 
                                                      

23 API (2009) in Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012). 
24 Warner, R. Darrah, T.H. Jackson, R.B. Millot, R. Kloppmann, W. Vengosh. A. (2014) New Tracers Identify Hydraulic Fracturing Fluids 
and Accidental Release from Oil and Gas Operations, in N Environmental Science & Technology, Oct. 20, 2014.  Available from 
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/es5032135 [Accessed April 2015]. 
25 Revkin, A.C. (2013) Ideas to Watch in 2013: Traceable Gas-Drilling Fluids.  Available from 
http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/01/08/ideas-to-watch-in-2013-traceable-frackin-fluids/ [Accessed November 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.8 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Has received a well notification under regulation 6 of the Borehole Sites and Operations 

Regulations 1995;  

  Has received the information required by regulation 19 of the Offshore Installations and Wells 

(Design and Construction, etc.) Regulations 1996; and  

  Has visited the site of the relevant well. 

The industry has, developed guidelines aimed at helping oil and gas well operators incorporate the latest 
developments in good practice across the full life cycle of well integrity operations26.   

On completion of drilling, the process of hydraulic fracturing and induced seismicity could itself damage the 
well casing and affect well integrity. Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) licensing requires 
seismic monitoring to assess likely faults and thus potential impacts on well integrity using a traffic light 
monitoring system27. 

Mobilisation of solutes or methane 
AEA (2012) highlights that hydraulic fracturing can affect the mobility of naturally occurring substances in the 
subsurface, particularly in the hydrocarbon-containing formation.  A concern centres on if fractures extend 
beyond the target formation and reach aquifers, contaminants could potentially migrate into drinking water 
supplies.   

The pollution of groundwater associated with unconventional oil and gas exploration and production has 
been widely reported in the US, although there is little evidence to suggest that this is as a direct result of the 
hydraulic fracturing process.  Warner et al (2012) found that in particular locations, methane and fugitive 
gases from deep geological layers can migrate upwards into shallow strata through natural pathways28.  
However, further work by Warner et al (2013) comprising an assessment of groundwater impacts in the 
Fayetteville shale development in Arkansas29 found no direct evidence of contamination in shallow drinking 
water aquifers associated with natural gas extraction, for natural hydraulic connectivity between deeper 
formations and shallow aquifers or for gas contamination in groundwater wells located near shale gas sites.  
This suggests that local geological conditions may influence the potential for contamination7.   

Initial findings of research being undertaken by the US EPA (2012) suggests that the most important 
parameters and conditions affecting the migration of contaminants from target formations to groundwater 
are: matrix permeability; fracture permeability; distance between the aquifer and the target formation; and the 
pressure regimes in the aquifer and the target formation.  AEA (2012) highlight that a separation of the order 
of 600 m would result in a remote risk of properly injected fluid resulting in contamination of potable 
groundwater.  The maximum length of some fractures has been reported to be 588 m, although the majority 
of fractures are less than 100 m and this compares to the vertical height of most of natural fractures as 
between 200-400m30.   
The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) summarised the findings of a study which 
compared fracture growth and depth of overlying water sources in four major US shale formations between 
2001 and 2010.  Seismic data indicated that the minimum vertical distances between the bottom of the 
                                                      

26 API (2009) API Guidance Document HF1 – ‘Hydraulic Fracturing Operations – Well Construction and Integrity Guidelines and Oil and 
Gas UK (2014), OP095 - Well Life Cycle Integrity Guidelines, Issue 2, June 2014 (2014).  Available from http://www.api.org/policy-and-
issues/policy-items/hf/api_hf1_hydraulic_fracturing_operations.aspx [Accessed April 2015]. 
27 The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (CIWEM) (2014) Shale Gas and Water: An independent review of 
shale gas exploration and exploitation in the UK with a particular focus on the implications for the water environment.  Available from 
http://www.ciwem.org/policy-and-international/current-topics/energy.aspx [Accessed April 2015]. 
28 Warner NR, Jackson RB, et al (2012) Geochemical evidence for possible natural migration of Marcellus formation brine to shallow 
aquifers in Pennsylvania. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(30): 11961–6.   
29 Warner NR, Kresse TM, et al (2013). Geochemical and isotopic variations in shallow groundwater in areas of the Fayetteville Shale 
development, north-central Arkansas. Appl Geochem 35: 207–20. 
30 Davies RJ, Mathias S, Moss J, Hustoft S and Newport L (2012) Hydraulic fractures: How far can they Go? Marine and Petroleum 
Geology in press.  Available from http://refine.org.uk/media/4886/hydraulicfractures.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
 

   

April 2015 

  B3.9 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

aquifer and the top of the fracture varied between 1200m and 6,000m, depending on the formation.  From a 
European perspective, the risk of contamination as a result of the hydraulic fracturing process is widely 
regarded to be low due to the likely distance between the fractures and aquifers.  AEA (2012) note that most 
but not all shale gas reservoirs in Europe exhibit a separation of more than 600 m between the depth of 
shale gas formations and aquifers.  However, where hydraulic fracturing takes place at shallower depths the 
risk may be greater.   
Within the UK, the amendments to the Petroleum Act 1998 arising from the Infrastructure Act 2015 include a 
commitment that a well consent will not be issued unless it imposes a condition which prohibits associated 
hydraulic fracturing from taking place in land at a depth of less than 1000 metres.  It will also require that the 
level of methane in groundwater has, or will have, been monitored in the period of 12 months before the 
associated hydraulic fracturing begins. The Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) stress 
that it is within an operator’s interest to ensure that fractures propagate in a controlled manner and remain 
within the target shale formation as excessive or uncontrolled growth would be uneconomic.  Their report 
identifies a number of methods to monitor fracture growth including the use of chemical tracers, tiltmeters 
and microseismic monitoring.  Additionally, in the UK, environmental regulators do not currently permit 
fracturing below freshwater aquifers.  In England and Wales, the Environment Agency has adopted the 
following policy in their Groundwater Protection Principles and Practice document: 

“We will object to [oil and conventional gas exploration and extraction] within SPZ131. Outside SPZ1, 
we will also object when the activity would have an unacceptable effect on groundwater. 

Where development does proceed, we expect BAT to protect groundwater to be applied where any 
associated drilling or operation of the boreholes passes through a groundwater resource. Elsewhere, 
established good practice for pollution prevention should be followed”.  

The requirement that hydraulic fracturing will not take place within protected groundwater source areas is 
repeated in amendments to the Petroleum Act 1998 arising in the Infrastructure Act 2015. 
The Environmental Agency should also be informed if any activity could involve the discharge of pollutants 
into groundwater.  A permit application will be required to include: 

  A conceptual model showing the hydrogeological relationship between the zone of  interest and 

any overlapping or adjacent aquifers; 

  The method of well construction, including details of the casing and grouting; 
  Information on how the integrity of the casing is to be tested; 
  Information on where the well stimulation fluid is expected to travel; and 

  Details of the liquids to be injected, water use and disposal of effluents.  

In Scotland, exploration would be likely to require a permit from the Scottish Environment Protection Agency 
(SEPA), under The Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011 (CAR) regime.  
For example, application for a CAR complex licence would be required to allow a deep borehole (>200m) to 
be constructed.  The resulting CAR licence would include conditions for maintenance and/or monitoring to 
ensure that the borehole does not result in contamination of groundwater.  The application would need to be 
accompanied by a risk assessment and details of chemicals in drilling fluids.32    

UKOOG (2013) guidelines, meanwhile, suggest operators develop a Hydraulic Fracturing Programme (HFP) 
“that describes the control and mitigation measures for fracture containment and for any potential induced 
seismicity”.  HFPs should: 

                                                      

31 Source Protection Zone (SPZ) are those areas close to drinking water sources where the risk associated with groundwater 
contamination is greatest.  SPZ1 extent is defined by 50-day travel time of groundwater from the borehole and a minimum 50 metre 
radius.   
32 SEPA (2012) Regulatory Guidance: Coal bed methane and shale gas.  Available from 
http://www.sepa.org.uk/customer_information/energy_industry.aspx [Accessed September 2013]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.10 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Include the proposed design of the fracture geometry including target zones, sealing 

mechanism and the location of aquifers, so as not to allow fracturing fluids to migrate to 
groundwater; 

  Contain performance standards to characterise the basis for the sealing mechanism and to 

demonstrate that adequate control measures will be implemented (such as microseismic and 
tiltmeter monitoring of hydraulic fracture growth); and 

  Document and reference research relating to faults that might impact hydraulic fracturing to 

demonstrate that fracturing fluids cannot migrate, via faults, beyond the designated fracturing 
zones(s). 

This has subsequently been proposed by Cuadrilla in respect of a temporary shale gas exploration site in 
Lancashire, England.  
Notwithstanding the above, there is a recognised need in the UK for a better understanding of shales and 
overlying geology to support site selection, design and monitoring.  In this respect, the British Geological 
Survey (BGS) has published mapping which shows the depth to each shale gas and oil source rock below 
principal groundwater aquifers in England and Wales33.  The BGS is also preparing a national baseline 
survey of methane focussing on areas where aquifers are underlain by shale units that may be exploited for 
shale gas34.   

Surface Water Spills 
Public Health England’s (2014) report on the health impacts of shale gas highlights, based on US 
experience, that the greatest risk of contamination of water sources is posed by the potential for surface 
spills.  The assessment of the potential sources of surface water spills during this stage has already been 
presented above.   

An analysis of groundwater BTEX (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene) following surface spills of 
processed water or crude oil associated with hydraulic fracturing operations by Gross et al (2013) identified 
levels that exceeded US national drinking water maximum contaminant levels (MCLs) for a number of 
samples, although the findings highlighted that remediation actions taken by the operators after the spill were 
effective in reducing these concentrations.   

Waste Water Treatment and Disposal 
Waste water treatment and disposal (particularly of flowback water) and its potential effects on water quality 
are dealt with in the section concerning waste (Appendix B.6).   

Water Consumption 
Hydraulic fracturing is a water intensive process.  Estimates of water use during hydraulic fracturing vary 
significantly and will ultimately depend on local geological characteristics including, for example, the depth of 
the shale and thickness of the overlying geology.  The SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing 
Round in the UK (AMEC, 2013)35 assumed that between 10,000 cubic metres and 25,000 cubic metres of 
                                                      

33 British Geological Survey (undated) Aquifers and shales.  Available from http://www.bgs.ac.uk/aquifers-shales/ [Accessed November 
2014]. 
34 British Geological Survey (undated) National methane baseline survey of UK groundwaters.  Available from  
http://www.bgs.ac.uk/research/groundwater/shaleGas/methaneBaseline/home.html [Accessed November 2014. 
35 AMEC (2013) Strategic Environmental Assessment for Further Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing: Environmental Report.  Prepared on 
behalf of the Department of Energy and Climate Change which drew on the AEA 2012 report which noted that horizontal shale gas wells 
typically use 10,000 to 25,000 m3 water per well, based largely on US analysis.  The AEA report also summarised the limited evidence 
from activity in Europe, which gave a range:  9000 – 29,000 m3/well (from Cuadrilla in Holland); 1,600m3 (Halliburton at Lubocino-1 well 
in Poland); 7,000m3 – 8,000m (the Danish Energy Agency).  Industry estimates suggest ranges of 10,000m3 to 20,000m3 
(http://www.total.com/en/energies-savoir-faire/petrole-gaz/exploration-production/secteurs-strategiques/gaz-non-conventionnels/focus-
gaz-de-schiste/environmental-challenges). 

   

April 2015 

  B3.11 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

water would be required per well during Stage 2 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production 
lifecycle.  This is broadly consistent with estimates relating to water use during the hydraulic fracturing of four 
wells associated with a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England which is 
anticipated to be in the region of 90,000 cubic metres over a 2-3 year period.  
Comparisons of water consumption between unconventional oil and gas production and other users have 
been made.  New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC in AEA, 2012) for 
example, highlights that water requirements associated with hydraulic fracturing would be expected to be low 
(less than 0.25% of the total water resource use in New York State based on the peak forecast usage rate 
for the oil and gas industry in the state).  Moor (2012) 36, meanwhile, highlights that water consumption of 
19,000m3 is the same amount of water needed: to water a golf course or a month; to run a 1GW coal fired 
power plant for 12 hrs; or the amount lost to leaks in the North West of England every hour.  Moor (2012) 
also notes that the rate of abstraction is important in that water is required only periodically as hydraulic 
fracturing is not a continuous process.   
Whilst the volume of water associated with hydraulic fracturing process is relatively low, effects on water 
resource availability could be significant locally.  AEA (2012) identify a number of potential effects that could 
occur as a result of water consumption associated with hydraulic fracturing activities37: 

  Reduced stream flow affecting the availability of resources for downstream use, such as for 

public water supply; 

  Adverse impacts on aquatic habitats and ecosystems arising from, for example, degradation of 

water quality, reduced water quantity, changes to water temperature, oxygenation and flow 
characteristics, including the effects of sediment and erosion under altered responses to 
stormwater runoff; 

  Interplay with downstream dischargers, affecting their ability to discharge where limits are 
related to stream flow rate, or the overall concentration of pollutants where discharge rates 
remain unaffected; and 

  Impacts on water quality, affecting the use which can be made of surface waters. 

The SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 2013) identified several factors 
that would need to be taken into consideration in order to determine the significance of water consumption 
on water resources. These include: 

  The timing of the consumption of the water (i.e. summer, winter, etc); 
  The possibility of cumulative effects occurring either as a result of multi well pads or several 

pads in one area; 

  Existing water resources and the volume of water presently extracted by existing users in that 

area; and 

  The volume of waste water than can be recycled and used as fresh injection fluid. 

These findings support those of Broderick et al (2011) who highlight that local effects could be much more 
significant in areas with low water resource availability, particularly in the longer term and taking into account 
the effects of climate change and increasing water demand38.  In the US, the USEPA (in AEA, 2012) has 
highlighted stakeholder concerns regarding high volume withdrawals from small streams in the headwaters 
of watersheds supplying drinking water in the Marcellus Shale area which may lead to the need for 
engineering solutions for reduced aquifer levels.  Further effects of reduced water levels cited in this report 
include:  
                                                      

(2012)  Gas  Works?  Shale  gas  and 

36  Moore 
http://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/gas%20works%20-%20feb%2012.pdf [Accessed September 2013].  
37 AEA (2012). 
38 Broderick J., et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts. A report commissioned by 
The Co-operative and undertaken by researchers at the Tyndall Centre, University of Manchester.  Available from 
http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

implications,  The  Policy  Exchange. 

its  policy 

  Available 

from 

   

April 2015 

  B3.12 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  The potential for chemical changes to aquifer water, including altered salinity, as a result of the 

exposure of naturally occurring minerals to an oxygen rich environment; 

  Stimulated bacterial growth, causing taste and odour problems in drinking water; and 
  Upwelling of lower quality water or other substances (e.g. methane – shallow deposits) from 

deeper and subsidence or destabilization of geology. 

The AEA (2012) report also highlights that, following low rainfall, water withdrawal permits for shale gas well 
development in the Susquehanna River Basin in Pennsylvania were temporarily suspended.  
The choice of a water supply will depend on a number of factors, including (NYSDEC in AEA, 2012):  

  Distance from, and location of, the source relative to the point of use.  The costs of transporting 

large quantities of water is a function of distance and travel times.  Planning permissions may 
control the number of vehicle movements and routes to be taken. 

  Available quantity and whether a single source can supply the required volume or whether 

multiple sources across a well field are required. 

  Reliability.  Shale gas operations require access to water year round and therefore a source that 

is always available is a more valuable one which may not be available during e.g. during 
periods of drought.  However, mitigation measures (e.g. reservoirs) can be used. 

  Accessibility.  The choice of a water supply may depend on whether locations where water is 

available are readily accessible. 

  Quality of water.  The composition of the water will affect the efficacy of the additives and 

equipment used.  Freshwater will be preferred over other sources. 

  Licensing.  Licences will be required for abstractions and these need to be obtained with 

acceptable conditions. 

  Cost. Sources that have a higher associated cost to acquire, treat, transport, licence, are less 

desirable. 

From a UK perspective, should water be supplied from a mains supply (either nearby to the site or tankered 
from a supply nearby), it would be the responsibility of the water utility company to ensure that the extra 
demand accords with the conditions of their water resource plans and abstraction licences.  In considering 
any licensed abstraction application, the responsible statutory body would also consider the effects on flows, 
the effects on other water users, the impacts on biota, and demands during low flow periods.  Licenses 
would only be granted where such effects are acceptable to the regulator.  Taking these regulatory 
requirements in to account, the SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 
2013) concluded that the risk of significant adverse effects on water resource availability as a result of 
hydraulic fracturing would be low.  Further, the SEA highlights that Water UK, which represents the water 
industry, and UKOOG have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) which ensures their respective 
members will cooperate throughout the shale gas exploration and extraction process in order minimise 
adverse effects on water resources and the environment.  Under the MoU, members of UKOOG and Water 
UK will undertake timely consultation and discussion in order to identify and resolve risks around water 
resource availability.  It is also noteworthy that the industry in Europe is not expected to be at substantial 
scale before the 2020s.  This will allow time for any necessary new investment in water supply infrastructure.   
Outside the regulatory process, effects on water resource availability may be mitigated through the recycling 
and reuse of flowback water (the fractured fluid injected into the shale rock during hydraulic fracturing which 
returns to the surface through the drilled well). Reported recycling rates in the US vary between 10% and 
77%39.  In the case of a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England, the operator 
(Cuadrilla) has indicated that the reuse of flowback water will reduce water requirements by approximately 
20%.    
                                                      

39 AEA (2012) pp 16 which noted studies identifying fresh water as comprising 80-90% of the water used as well as studies reporting up 
to 77% of wastewater generated from the Pennsylvania Marcellus Shale being recycled. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.13 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Water demand could also be reduced through the adoption of waterless fracturing technologies including 
nitrogen gas fluids such as gels and carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas foams8.  There are examples of 
waterless technologies being deployed in the US including, for example, at the Utica trial wells in Ohio which 
used liquid petroleum gas40. 

Overall, when compared with other activities, water demand associated with hydraulic fracturing is relatively 
low.  However, in already water stressed environments effects on water resource availability could 
nonetheless be significant, particularly if multiple developments come forward within a catchment.  
Notwithstanding, regulation such as that employed in the UK could help to ensure that water demand 
associated with hydraulic fracturing does not place undue pressure on water resource availability.   

Flood Risk 
As noted above, pad preparation would involve the removal of vegetation and general groundworks to a site 
and the laying of an impermeable surface to reduce the risk of contaminants leaking into soil/groundwater.  
This surface would change the natural drainage patterns of the site and could result in the increase of 
flooding off site as runoff rates may be faster and the natural water storage the site provides would be lost.  
This risk is similar to other large (particularly greenfield) construction sites.  

Sites located within areas of flood risk may also be susceptible to flooding.  The SEA of the 14th Onshore Oil 
and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 2013) highlights that, where sites are in flood risk areas, the 
following risks may arise: 

  The well may become inundated with flood water and disrupt drilling or cause damage to the 

casing; 

  Plant and equipment may be damaged; 

  Storage tanks may become damaged or suffer a loss of power and may release contaminants 

into the flood water; and 

  Hydrocarbons may be released and cause pollution or lead to explosions or fires. 

In the UK, site based Flood Risk Assessment would be required for all developments over one hectare 
(10,000 sqm) and/or where flood risk may be an issue.   Due consideration would also be given to flood risk 
issues at the planning application stage.  With standard mitigation including, for example, the installation of 
drainage channels, flood risk would therefore not be expected to represent a significant issue in the UK 
context.     

Production Development 
During production, the risk to groundwater and surface water bodies as well as flood risk would be similar to 
that at Stage 2.  However, as additional wells would be drilled/fractured the risk of inadequate well design or 
accidents occurring could be higher.  
Water consumption at this stage would also be considerably higher, reflecting the drilling and fracturing of 
additional wells.  As during Stage 2, it is estimated that between 10,000m3 to 25,000m3 of water would be 
required per well and whilst the number of wells per pad will vary, some of research suggests that pads 
could have up to 24 wells.  As highlighted above, when compared with other activities, water demand 
associated with hydraulic fracturing is relatively low but in water stressed areas the volume of water 
potentially required during Stage 3 could place substantial pressure on resource availability.   However, 
appropriate regulation such as that adopted in the UK and the recycling of flowback water for reinjection 
(following treatment) could help to ensure that water demand associated with hydraulic fracturing does not 
place undue pressure on water resource availability.   

Waste water treatment and disposal (particularly of flowback water) is dealt with in the section concerning 
waste. 
                                                      

40 Brino, A. (2012) Waterless fracking technique makes its debut in Ohio in Mid West Energy News.  Available from 
http://www.midwestenergynews.com/2012/05/15/waterless-fracking-technique-makes-its-debut-in-ohio/ [Accessed November 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.14 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Once wells are operational, the primary issue with regards to water will be the collection and disposal of 
produced water.  ‘Produced water’ is any water that is “produced” to the surface from an oil or gas reservoir 
along with the oil or gas. This water may come from the following sources: 

  Connate water present in the reservoir prior to production; 
  Condensed water which is condensed out of the produced gas in the production tubing; and 
  Injected water which has broken through from the injection wells to the producers.  

The major substances found in produced water typically include: hydrocarbons, sands, dissolved salts and 
iron, metals and Naturally Occurring Radioactive Minerals (NORMS).   The handling and management of 
produced water may pose a risk to surface and ground water contamination due to accidental spills and 
runoff, similar to those described under the assessment of Stage 2.   
During the production stage, there would be ongoing risks of surface and ground water contamination issues 
associated with well integrity, as described above.  Additionally, re-fracturing may be required in order to 
stimulate the flow of shale gas.  In the US, the frequency of re-fracturing is not certain and is estimated to be 
once per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  For the purposes of their report, AEA (2012) assumed that a well 
would be re-fractured between 0 and 4 times over a well lifetime of up to 40 years.  The risks of 
contamination associated with re-fracturing would be similar to those during stages 2 and 3 although AEA 
(2012) note that, whilst wells would be monitored during re-fracturing, there is uncertainty with respect to the 
risks associated with re-fracturing on well integrity.   
Re-fracturing would result in additional water demand.  However, the reuse of fracturing fluid may be a more 
economically viable option during production, compared to the exploration stage, thereby potentially reducing 
the volume of water required during re-fracturing.   

Surface water runoff and flood risk aspects would be the same as those identified at stages 2 and 3. 

Decommissioning of wells 
Following production, wells must be properly closed with cement plugs and/or mechanical barriers in the 
wellbore to eliminate the pathway to the surface or freshwater sources27.  The inadequate sealing of wells 
could therefore result in subsurface pathways for contaminant migration leading to groundwater pollution and 
potentially surface water pollution. 

AEA (2012) highlight that there is normally no pathway for release of fluids used during hydraulic fracturing 
to other formations and that some of the chemicals used in fracturing fluids will be adsorbed to the rocks or 
biodegraded in situ and that for shale gas measures at significant depths, the volume of the rock between 
the producing formation and the groundwater is substantially greater than the volume of fracturing fluid used.  
Experience in the US to-date is that the risks posed by poorly controlled and logged historical wells far 
outweigh the risks posed by wells designed and constructed to current standards. 
From a UK perspective, well decommissioning requires regulatory approval from DECC.  Regulation 15 of 
the Offshore Installations and Wells (Design and Construction, etc) Regulations 1996, meanwhile, require 
that operators ensure that wells are designed and constructed such that (so far as is reasonably practicable), 
they can be suspended or abandoned in a safe manner; and after suspension or abandonment there can be 
no unplanned escape of fluids from it or from the reservoir to which it led.  In consequence, the SEA of the 
14th Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing Round in the UK (AMEC, 2013) concludes that it would be anticipated 
that all steps would be taken to ensure permanent isolation of subsurface formations and groundwater.  
There is no specific regulatory requirement for post abandonment monitoring in the UK.  However, DECC 
requires that operators indicate, as part of their Environmental Risk Assessment, how risks associated with 
aftercare operations and monitoring are expected to be addressed in the period until permits are surrendered 
or control of the site relinquished. The scope and duration of the monitoring requirements will be agreed 
between the operator and DECC in consultation with other Government Departments. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.15 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The decommissioning activities at this stage may require water (i.e. for cement etc) but this would not be of a 
scale likely to result in any effects on local water demand and availability. 
In terms of flood risk, there would be no change in the risk of increased surface water runoff than expected 
for Stages 2 to 4.   

Site restoration and relinquishment 
Site restoration activities pose a low risk to water resources and flooding. The generation of dust may 
however increase the turbidity of nearby surface water bodies. 

3.1  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  Surface Water Management Plans should be prepared setting out measures for controlling 

runoff including, for example, the installation of drainage channels. 

  Assessments of flood risk should be undertaken as part of the site selection process.  These 
assessments should seek to identify and categorise the potential risk of flooding to/from a site 
and appropriate mitigation. 

 Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Surface Water Management Plans should be prepared setting out measures for controlling 

runoff including, for example, the installation of drainage channels and measures to test, 
discharge or (if necessary) treat surface water. 

  Assessments of flood risk should be undertaken as part of the site selection process.  These 
assessments should seek to identify and categorise the potential risk of flooding to/from a site 
and appropriate mitigation. 

  The well pad should be constructed from compacted aggregate laid on an impermeable 

membrane and geotextile layer.  Surface water runoff would be collected and attenuated via 
perimeter ditches.  There should be no connectivity between the runoff ditches from the well 
pad and any other surface water features adjacent to the well pad.  Onsite storage facilities 
should also be bunded where appropriate. 

  HGV routes should be agreed with the relevant regulator(s) in order to minimise the risk of 

accidents occurring. 

  All potentially polluting substances should be stored in suitable vessels which are designed to 

ensure safe storage. 

  A closed loop system should be used to contain drilling muds and reduce the risk of spillages; 
  Accident Management Plans should be developed and spill kits provided to ensure the 

prevention/containment of accidental spills. 

  Wells should comprise at least a two-barrier cement sealed design with surface casing. 

  Blowout preventers should be installed during drilling in order to prevent any sudden or 

uncontrolled escape of fluids. 

  Measures should be adopted to ensure well integrity including consultation on well design with 

appropriate regulators, bore testing, cement testing, the installation of a cement bond and 

   

April 2015 

  B3.16 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

continual pressure and formation pressure testing.  The results of well integrity testing should be 
independently verified. 

  Guidance in relation to the minimum separation distance of wells should be developed so as to 

avoid blowout. 

  A Hydraulic Fracturing Programme similar to that in operation in the UK should be prepared by 

the operator and agreed with the relevant regulator. 

  Where possible, non-hazardous chemicals should be used in fracturing fluids. 
  Consideration should be given to the development of a list of approved chemicals for use in 

fracturing fluids or, as in the UK, a methodology to enable regulators to assess the hazard 
potential of any chemicals used. 

  Careful consideration should be given during site selection to water resource availability, in 

liaison with water providers and regulators.  The operator and the revenant regulator(s) should 
assess the potential impacts on water resources at an early stage. 

  Options to reduce water demand during hydraulic fracturing should be considered where 
possible.  This may include the treatment and re-use of flowback water or the adoption of 
waterless technologies. 

  Guidelines should be developed to establish best practice in unconventional oil and gas 

exploration and production. 

  Rainwater collected on the surface of the pad should be regularly tested to determine whether it 

is uncontaminated and can be discharged from site or used within the hydraulic fracturing 
process, or whether it requires collection and removal from site as hazardous waste e.g. if 
contaminated with oil/chemicals. 

  Ongoing groundwater monitoring should be undertaken in order to determine the presence of 

contaminants/methane.  Monitoring wells should be established and the sampling of near 
surface aquifers undertaken.  Tracers should also be added to fracturing fluids. 

  Ambient air monitoring should be undertaken in order to detect gas leakage. 
  Regular seismic monitoring should be undertaken by the operator (and independently verified) 

to assess likely faults and the potential impact on well integrity. 

  The propagation of fractures should be monitored (for example, through the use of chemical 

tracers, tiltmeters and microseismic monitoring). 

  Permits should require information relating to (inter-alia), the relationship between the zone of  

interest and any overlapping or adjacent aquifers, methods of well construction, well integrity 
testing, where the well stimulation fluid is expected to travel, details of the liquids to be injected, 
water use and disposal of effluents. 

  Well abandonment/decommissioning plans should be prepared by operators and agreed with 

the relevant regulator(s).  These should include details of any monitoring to be undertaken 
following well abandonment and the means of well plugging. 

Production Development 
As for Stage 2. 

Production/operation/maintenance  
As for Stage 2. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.17 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Decommissioning of wells 
As for Stage 2. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  Plant and vehicles involved in this work should be checked regularly to ensure they are in good 

condition and not leaking fuels; 

  If any contaminants are identified, they should be handled appropriately to ensure they are not 

spilt or liable to reach ground/surface waters; 

  Soil re-profiling should take permeability into consideration so as to ensure surface water runoff 

rates are similar to baseline conditions; and 

  Hardstanding which is to remain in situ should be kept to a minimum. 

3.2  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The Water Framework Directive (WFD) is the most substantial piece of EC water legislation to date and 
replaces a number of Directives including the Surface Water Abstraction Directive.  It establishes a 
framework for the protection of inland surface waters, transitional waters, coastal water and groundwater and 
is designed to improve and integrate the way water bodies are managed, including encouraging the 
sustainable use of water resources.  The key objectives at the European level are general protection of the 
aquatic ecology, specific protection of unique and valuable habitats, protection of drinking water resources, 
and protection of bathing water.  
In accordance with Article 4(1), the Directive objectives for surface water, groundwater, transitional and 
coastal water bodies are to: 

  Prevent deterioration; 
  Reduce pollution; 
  Protect, enhance and restore condition; 

  Achieve ‘good status’ by 2015, or an alternative objective where allowed; and 
  Comply with requirements for protected areas. 

Article 7.3 of the Directive notes that member states shall ensure the necessary protection for the bodies of 
water identified [for the purposes of providing human consumption for 50 persons or more] with the aim of 
avoiding deterioration in their quality in order to reduce the level of purification treatment required in the 
production of drinking water. In addition, member states may establish safeguard zones for those bodies of 
water.  

The WFD adopts the ‘polluters pays principle’ in seeking to ensure that the costs and benefits of discharging 
pollutants to the water environment are appropriately valued, and that implementation of the Directive is 
achieved in a fair and proportionate way across all sectors. 
The aim of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive 2008 is to protect more effectively the marine 
environment across Europe.  It aims to achieve good environmental status of the EU's marine waters by 
2021 and to protect the resource base upon which marine-related economic and social activities depend. 
With specific regard to coastal water quality, the Bathing Waters Directive 2006/7/EC sets standards for the 
quality of bathing waters in terms of: 

  The physical, chemical and microbiological parameters;  
  The mandatory limit values and indicative values for such parameters; and  

   

April 2015 

  B3.18 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  The minimum sampling frequency and method of analysis or inspection of such water.  

The Floods Directive 2007/60/EC aims to provide a consistent approach to managing flood risk across 
Europe.  The approach is based on a 6 year cycle of planning which includes the publication of Preliminary 
Flood Risk Assessments, hazard and risk maps and flood risk management plans.  The Directive is 
transposed into English law by the Flood Risk Regulations 2009. 
The Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive 91/271/EEC has the objective of protecting the environment 
from the adverse effects of untreated ‘urban waste water’ (‘sewage’).  The Directive establishes minimum 
requirements for the treatment of significant sewage discharges.  An important aspect of the Directive is the 
protection of the water environment from nutrients, (specifically compounds of nitrogen and phosphorus), 
and/or nitrates present in waste water where these substances have adverse impacts on the ecology of the 
water environment or abstraction source waters.  It was transposed into English law through the Urban 
Waste Water Treatment (England and Wales) Regulations 1994 (as amended). 
The Mining Waste Directive 2006/21/EC aims to prevent or reduce as far as possible the adverse effects on 
the environment and any resultant risks to human health from the management of waste from the extractive 
industries.  The Directive sets out how to achieve this aim by providing for measures, procedures and 
guidance on how extractive industries should be managed. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Directive 2011/92/EU aims for the environmental impacts from 
certain projects to be identified and for mitigation measures to be proposed.  Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) are not mandated for all shale gas operations and would be necessary when operations 
exceed 500,000m3 gas extraction or are deemed likely to have significant environmental impacts, which 
could include impacts associated on water resources. 
The Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive (2008/1/EC) requires industrial activities to 
have a permit (issued by the relevant competent authority of the member state) containing emission limit 
values and other conditions based on the application of Best Available Techniques (BAT) and set to 
minimise emissions of pollutants likely to be emitted in significant quantities to air, water or land.  Permit 
conditions also have to address energy efficiency, waste minimisation, prevention of accidental emissions 
and site restoration. 

In addition, the following European Directives have relevance to the protection of the water environment and 
resources: 

  Dangerous Substances Directive 76/464/EEC; 
  Quality of Shellfish Waters Directive 79/923/EEC; 

  Directive on Priority Substances 2008/105/EC;  
  Groundwater Directive 2006/118/EC; 
  Waste Framework Directive 2008/98/EC; 

  Industrial Emissions Directive 2010/75/EU; and 
  Drinking Water Directive 98/83/EC. 

UK 
The Water Resources Act 1991 makes various provisions in respect of the protection of groundwater in 
England and Wales. Section 199 requires notice to be given to the Environment Agency of an intention to 
construct or extend a borehole for the purposes of searching for, or the extraction of, minerals.  The 
Environment Agency also requires notification of an intention to extract groundwater and where the operation 
is likely to extract in excess of 20m3 per day, the operator will require an abstraction licence. 
Section 50 of the Infrastructure Act 2015 inserts an amendment to the Petroleum Act 1998 regarding 
safeguards for onshore hydraulic fracturing.  These include a commitment that a well consent will not be 
issued unless it imposes a condition which prohibits associated hydraulic fracturing from taking place in land 
at a depth of less than 1000 metres, identifies that certain areas will be excluded from hydraulic fracturing 

   

April 2015 

  B3.19 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

(groundwater source protection zones and internationally and nationally designated conservation sites) and 
requires that a range of conditions are met before a hydraulic fracturing consent can be issued.   
A permit under the Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 (EPR) is required 
where fluids containing pollutants are injected into rock formations that contain groundwater (a “groundwater 
activity” under the EPR).  An environmental permit may also be needed if the activity poses a risk of 
mobilising natural substances that could then cause pollution.  The permit, if granted, will specify limits on 
the activity and any requirements for monitoring.  The regulations stipulate that there must be no direct 
discharge of pollutants into groundwater whilst the indirect entry of non-hazardous pollutants must be limited 
so as not to cause pollution.  If the target formation does not contain any significant groundwater, or is so 
deep that it falls outside any hydrogeologically active zone, there may be no groundwater activity to permit.  
However, a permit will be required if the regulator (the Environment Agency) considers well stimulation might 
lead to the movement of pollutants into adjacent groundwater that would not otherwise have received them.  
Pollutants in this case might be substances introduced by fracturing or the mobilisation of natural substances 
like hydrocarbons from the target formation.  
The Environment Agency requires operators to submit the following details:  

  A conceptual model showing the hydrogeological relationship between the zone of interest and 

any overlying or adjacent aquifers; 

  The method of well construction, including details of the casing and grouting; 
  Information on how the integrity of the casing is to be tested; 

  Information on the location of the proposed operation and where the well stimulation fluid is 

expected to travel to; 

  Details of the liquids to be injected, water ingress, water use and disposal of effluents; 
  Details of any chemicals added in the process or substances used to prop open fissures; 

  Safeguards to prevent cross-contamination of aquifers; 
  Safeguards to prevent uncontrolled loss of fluids in the borehole to formations or ground surface 

(blowouts); 

  Potential quality risks to receptors and groundwater resources; 

  Details of how the operation itself is to be monitored; and 
  Proposed environmental monitoring (including monitoring groundwater and surface water 

receptors). 

Schedule 22 (paragraph 7) of the EPR covers the analysis the regulator needs to apply to set permit 
conditions to ensure the environmental objectives of Article 4 of the WFD are met.  Consistent with Article 
11(3)(j) of the WFD, paragraph 8 of the EPR states that: 

“…the regulator may grant an environmental permit for— 
  (a) the injection of water containing substances resulting from the operations for exploration and 
extraction of hydrocarbons or mining activities, and injection of water for technical reasons, into 
geological formations from which hydrocarbons or other substances have been extracted or into 
geological formations which for natural reasons are permanently unsuitable for other purposes, 
provided that the injection doesn’t contain substances other than those resulting from the above 
operations.” 

The intention of this clause is to allow for the return of water naturally present in geological formations. 
However, it should be noted that the European Commission’s opinion is that Article 11(3)(j) of the WFD (and, 
by extension, paragraph 8 of the EPR) does not apply to shale gas operations as the water resulting from 

   

April 2015 

  B3.20 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

shale gas activities is expected to consist mainly of flowback fluid rather than naturally occurring formation 
water and which requires treatment in accordance with the Mining Water Directive41.     
In Scotland, activities liable to have an adverse effect on the water environment fall within the scope of the 
Water Environment (Controlled Activities) (Scotland) Regulations 2011. The Scottish Environment 
Protection Agency (SEPA) has taken the view that drilling for the purposes of unconventional gas extraction, 
due to the drilling depth being greater than 200m, falls within the scope of the Regulations and will require 
authorisation. Operators are expected to consult SEPA in advance of any application to discuss the 
operation and agree any mitigation and monitoring measures that will be applied.  Where SEPA considers 
that the activity poses an unacceptable risk to the water environment or other water users, authorisation will 
be withheld.  
The Flood and Water Management Act 2010 makes provisions about water, including those related to 
water resources, including: 

  To widen the list of uses of water that water companies can control during periods of water 

shortage, and enable the UK Government to add to and remove uses from the list; 

  To encourage the uptake of sustainable drainage systems by removing the automatic right to 

connect to sewers and providing for unitary and county councils to adopt SUDS for new 
developments and redevelopments; 

  To reduce ‘bad debt’ in the water industry by amending the Water Industry Act 1991 to provide 

a named customer and clarify who is responsible for paying the water bill; and 

  To make it easier for water and sewerage companies to develop and implement social tariffs 
where companies consider there is a good cause to do so, and in light of guidance that will be 
issued by the Secretary of State following a full public consultation.  

The Flood and Water Management Act 2010 contains provisions for regional working and co-operation such 
as the establishment of regional flood and coastal committees and the bringing together of lead local flood 
authorities, who will have a duty to cooperate, to develop local strategies for managing local flood risk. In 
addition, the Flood Risk Regulations 2009 impose a duty on the Environment Agency and lead local flood 
authorities to take steps to identify and prepare for significant flood risk. 
Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs), currently under revision by Coastal Groups and the Environment 
Agency, assess the risks to people, development, and the natural and historic environment from coastal 
processes.  These plans (SPM2) will provide a route map for local authorities for the time period of the next 
20 years, and leading up to the next 50-100 years.  They will include an action plan of what is required to 
manage coastal processes and where, and will form the basis of decision making for such works.   
The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 sets out a number of measures including the establishment of 
Marine Conservation Zones (MCZs) and Marine Spatial Plans.  The main objectives of the Marine Policy 
Statement (2011) are to enable an appropriate and consistent approach to marine planning across UK 
waters, and to ensure the sustainable use of marine resources and strategic management of marine 
activities from renewable energy to nature conservation, fishing, recreation and tourism. 
The Offshore Installations and Wells (Design and Construction, etc) Regulations 1996 (which apply to 
all wells drilled in the UK regardless of whether they are onshore or offshore) place goal-setting duties on 
installation owners and operators to ensure the integrity of an installation throughout its lifecycle and provide 
a framework for ensuring the safe condition of wells on land and offshore including an examination scheme.  
The regulations require that the Health and Safety Executive is notified of all drilling operations for oil or gas, 
and have an opportunity to scrutinise the well design and operational plan before exploration activities begin.  
The regulations specify that operators should ensure that there can be no unplanned escape of fluids from 
the well and require wells to be examined by an ‘independent and competent person ‘(‘well examiner’).  The 

                                                      

41 See Note for the Attention of Mr Matthew Groote, Chair of the Envi Committee, European Parliament: Transmission Note on the EU 
environmental legal framework applicable to shale gas projects.  26th January, 2012.  Available form 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/legal_assessment.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B3.21 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

examiner can request the results of any well integrity tests and raise any health and safety concerns with the 
operator. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.1 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

4.  Air 

4.1 

Introduction 

Air quality within this context concerns the levels of pollutants emitted into the air and their significance, in 
terms of the risk of adverse effects on the environment and/or human health.  Carbon dioxide and other 
greenhouse gas emissions are excluded from the air quality topic and are reported under the climate change 
and adaptation topic.  
There are links between the air quality topic and other topics in the study, specifically human health, climate 
change and waste.  

4.2  Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on air arising from the potential activities that could 
arise in one of the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production.  Table B4.1 
presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and decommissioning. 

Table B4.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage  

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 
  Seismic surveys; 

  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 

  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 
  Well design construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 
  Provision of pipeline connections  

  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

   

April 2015 

  B4.2 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B4.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage  

4 

5 

6 

Activities 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
On site non-intrusive exploration surveys would result in emissions from vehicles and machinery.  Due to the 
minor scale of works required and the short term duration of these surveys, the effect of air emissions is 
expected to be negligible at this stage. However, should significant new road infrastructure be required to 
facilitate site access then there may be the risk of increased emissions to air. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
The preparation of the pad site would involve the removal of vegetation and topsoil for the area involved, 
plus levelling of the ground and laying a surface comprising of membrane layers and aggregates.  Heavy 
machinery and generators used for the site preparation would give rise to exhaust emissions, however this is 
expected to be of limited significance during the initial preparations compared to drilling and fracturing 
activities and would be similar to other large construction projects including conventional oil and gas 
exploration (although the volume of emissions could be greater commensurate with the size of well pad 
associated with unconventional oil and gas exploration)1.  The preparation activities may involve vehicle 
movements over unpaved ground and the handling of dusty materials.   
The exact scale of works required to clear and prepare the site would depend on local factors such as 
geology, habitat and hydrology.  However estimates by Cuadrilla for Preston New Road, Lancashire UK, 
indicated that site preparation and construction of the well pad and access track would take up to two 
months,2 and Cuadrilla estimated for the Becconsall site that vehicle delivery and handling of 3,200 tonnes of 

                                                            
1 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe p.250,  Table A6.2  and section 2.4.4.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
2 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement pp.32-35.  
Available from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.3 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

aggregate would be required during preparation.3  The pad preparation would give rise to dust, particularly 
during periods of low rainfall.  Minor construction work such as construction of access roads, security fences 
and site cabins for the workforce would also take place, all of which may give rise to minor releases of dust.4 

Like other types of construction projects, HGV movements would be required to transport materials to and 
from the site during each of the activities under this stage, especially for the provision of water for hydraulic 
fracturing if pipelines to a mains supply are not in place.  It is estimated stage 2 would generate a significant 
increase in vehicle movements, including both HGVs and smaller vehicles.  The principal emissions from 
diesel and petrol engines are carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen oxides (NOx), un-burnt hydrocarbons and 
particulate matter (PM).  CO, NOx, hydrocarbons and PM can all cause adverse health effects, particularly 
for the respiratory system (outlined in more detail in Appendix B.9 Health).  NOx also contributes to smog 
and ground level ozone formation with further potential health impacts, in addition to the environmental 
effects of acid rain formation and damage to vegetation.5  Carbon dioxide (CO2) is also released from vehicle 
exhausts (the climate change impact from this is discussed further in Appendix B.5 Climate). 
The scale of vehicle movements may have a negative effect on air quality due to emissions from vehicles 
along the transport route, although this may be relatively minor and localised.  The proposed Cuadrilla 
operations in Preston New Road, Lancashire, estimate the increased transport as a result of their operations 
for the well pad and fracturing would include average daily movements of: 34 two-way movements per day 
during pad construction (lasting two months), 46 two-way movements per day during mobilisation and drilling 
of the first well (five months), 49 two-way movements for drilling of three subsequent wells (lasting three 
months each), 35 two-way movements per day during hydraulic fracturing (one to two months per well) and 
23 two-way movements per day during initial flow testing (three to four months) on average.6   While 
temporary, vehicle movements could peak at 250 truck movements per day during the most intense periods 
which would be sustained for a few days1.  In addition to exhaust fumes, vehicles are also expected to track 
dust and dirt from the site, particularly when travelling over unpaved ground although such effects can be 
mitigated to some extent through the use of wheel washes and vehicle sprays.4 

However, given the temporary nature of this work, these movements are not expected to result in significant 
effects on air quality, although there maybe localised transient effects, depending on the existing local air 
quality.  The movement of water and waste during the hydraulic fracturing process are the greatest 
contributors to the number vehicle movements, and the movement of HGVs needed during fracturing itself 
could be approximately halved if pipeline connections for water and waste water are in place.1   
The installation of surface and buried arrays used to collect seismic data and for monitoring fluid injection is 
not anticipated to generate any significant air emissions due to the limited earthworks and vehicle 
movements required.2 
The drilling of the exploratory well would take place across approximately five months for the vertical and 
horizontal sections of the first well (for a depth of 3,500m and lateral distance of 2,000m), with subsequent 
wells expected to take three months each.2  Drilling works would include construction activities such as 
casing and cementing as well as the drilling itself.  Diesel generators are likely to be used to power the 
drilling rigs.  Cuadrilla estimates the use of three generators to be used 24 hours per day during drilling 
operations.7  These generators emit a number of pollutants including NOx, hydrocarbons, CO, and PM.  
Simultaneously with drilling operations, it is expected that there would be movements of vehicles to and from 
the site as outlined above.  Typical emissions of air pollutants for diesel generators used in hydraulic 
fracturing are set out below in Table B4.2. 

                                                            
3 Cuadrilla Resources Ltd (2010) Becconsall Hydrocarbon Exploration Site, Planning Application July 2010, Section 2 – Supporting 
Statement to the Application.   
4 Celtique Energie Weald Ltd (2014) Northup Field, Wisborough Green, Planning Application, Chapter 15 Air Quality. 
5 Vehicle Certification Agency, Department for Transport (2014) Cars and Air Pollution.  Available from 
http://www.dft.gov.uk/vca/fcb/cars-and-air-pollution.asp [Accessed November 2014]. 
6 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Appendix R1 – Transport Assessment (Exploration Works).   
7 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Appendix F – Air Quality. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.4 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B4.2   Typical specific emissions of air pollutants from stationary diesel engines used for drilling, 
hydraulic fracturing and completion 

 

SO2 

NOx 

PM 

CO 

Non-methane VOCs 

Emissions per engine fuel input 
[g/kWhdiesel] 

Emissions per natural gas throughput 
of well [g/kWhNG] 

0.253 

3.487 

0.291 

0.756 

0.011 

0.004 

0.059 

0.005 

0.013 

0.000 

 
Source: European Parliament (2011) Impacts of shale gas and shale oil extraction on the environment and on human health 
 

During the hydraulic fracturing process, diesel fumes would also be emitted from the pumps that inject 
fracturing fluid into the well.  Emissions include PM, NOx, CO, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and 
sulphur dioxide (SO2).  For Mercellus Shale wells in the US, it was estimated that diesel fuel use from 
pumping during hydraulic fracturing amounts to 111,000 litres diesel per well.8  For Cuadrilla’s exploratory 
drilling in Preston New Road, Lancashire, this is expected to include a generator operating for 24 hours per 
day during fracturing, plus a further 12 generators in use for less than 12 hours per day during fracturing and 
other operations.7  While the duration of fracturing activities may vary, it is expected that this would last up to 
two months for each well, broken down into 30 – 45 fracturing stages within the well.2 
In addition, it is expected that dust would be generated during hydraulic fracturing by the on-site handling 
(conveying and blending) the proppant, which is normally sand based.  It is estimated that 0.25% of the 
proppant sand may be emitted to air as fine dust.9 

Methane can be emitted from unconventional gas extraction during the fracturing stage.  As the fracturing 
fluid returns to the surface, it also contains natural gas and small amounts of VOCs.  The volume of gas 
released from flowback water will vary with the amount of fracturing fluid injected into the rock formation and 
subsequently returning to the surface, along with well and gas pressures.  Flowback water typically returns to 
the surface within the first few days or weeks following injection of fracturing fluid.  Studies in the US have 
estimated the volume of gas released from flowback water to range between 260,000 – 1,180,000m3 per 
well.  This represents the entire volume of gas released from flowback water and does not reflect measures 
to contain or capture the gas, so is expected to overstate the actual emissions to air from flowback in the UK, 
given that holding ponds cannot be used and the requirements for reduced emission and ‘green 
completions’.10   

In the UK, flaring is regulated by DECC as part of a licence condition and it is DECC’s established policy that 
flaring should be reduced to the economic minimum.11  Flaring would primarily result in the production of CO2 
but also NOX, SO2, CO, and PM, as well as methane and VOCs in the event of incomplete combustion.10  
Emissions to air during flaring may be a greater issue during the exploratory stages, as there is less likely to 
be gas collection infrastructure in place compared to the later production stages.  Cuadrilla anticipates flaring 

                                                            
8 Broderick J., et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts. A report commissioned by The Co-operative and undertaken by researchers at the Tyndall Centre, 
University of Manchester.  Available from http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf [Accessed April 
2015]. 
9 Kellam P. (2012) New Standards for Location Safety and Environmental Concerns, SPE Workshop, Reducing Environmental Impact of 
Unconventional Resource Development, San Antonio, Texas, April 2012, as cited in AEA (2012). 
10 Mackay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use, 
Department of Energy and Climate Change.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/237330/MacKay_Stone_shale_study_report_09092013.p
df [Accessed April 2015]. 
11 DECC (2013) About Shale Gas and Hydraulic Fracturing (Fracking).  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/268017/About_shale_gas_and_hydraulic_fracturing_Dec
_2013.pdf [Accessed April 2015], 

   

April 2015 

  B4.5 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

to take place during an initial test period for 90 days.2  Venting natural gas is not permitted in the UK, except 
for safety reasons, as part of DECC’s licence conditions.12 

As an alternative to flaring, ‘green completion’ involves the capture of methane from the fracturing process 
for use or export off site to reduce emissions to air.12  Although not occurring at all sites, a recent study in the 
US found that for sites that capture gas emissions from flowback water, 99% of the potential emissions were 
captured during the green completion process.13  Green completions can therefore significantly reduce the 
amount of methane released to air from flowback fluid, however appropriate infrastructure for transport 
offsite may not be in place until later production stages.  For the UK, MacKay and Stone (2013) 
recommended that green completions should be adopted at all stages following exploration and that 
emissions of methane should be reduced to as low a level as reasonably practicable (ALARP), and the UK 
Government has accepted this recommendation.14   

After the initial recovery of the hydraulic flowback fluid (in the flowback water), produced water will continue 
in many cases to come to the surface with decreasing quantities of hydraulic fracturing fluid.  Produced water 
is generated from the rocks across the lifetime of the well while produced water is not expected to be 
generated in significant quantities in the UK due to the low permeability of shale, it can be a greater issue in 
other locations.  Produced water can also collect in the well over time, reducing the flow of natural gas.  In 
some cases, this may necessitate the expulsion of liquid under high pressure (‘blowdown’) which would 
further cause methane to be released to air.15  
Leakages (fugitive emissions) of methane and other pollutants such as NOx, CO and hydrocarbons may 
occur during well completion and well production from pumps, valves, pressure relief valves, flanges, 
agitators and compressors.1  Glycol dehydrators, used to remove water from the natural gas stream, are a 
further source of methane emissions.  A recent study of 150 sites in the US found releases of methane from 
pneumatic controllers and equipment leaks to be the greatest contributors to methane emissions, with 
flowback emissions having been reduced substantially through improved gas collection during flowback.  By 
their design, pneumatic devices typically release small quantities of methane on a continuous or intermittent 
basis.15  Overall, methane emissions during the hydraulic fracturing process were found to represent an 
average of 0.42% of gross gas production.13 
During the exploration and pilot stages, there may be smaller, less robust gas pipeline infrastructure in place 
connecting the well to the main gas pipeline, compared to later stages.  There may therefore be fugitive 
emissions of methane and other gases during the transport of gas off site through the temporary pipelines.  It 
is anticipated that fugitive emissions are less likely from more robust pipeline infrastructure put in place 
during later production stages.  These gases may include methane, ethane, CO2, hydrogen sulphide, 
nitrogen and helium, in addition to volatile and semi-volatile organic compounds and naturally occurring 
radioactive material (NORM).1 

Unconventional gas wells typically produce more cuttings per well than conventional wells.  A vertical well 
with a depth of 2,100m would produce an average of 120m3 of cuttings, while an unconventional well with an 
additional lateral 1,200m section would produce approximately 170m3 of cuttings.1  These cuttings would 
need to be transported off site for treatment and/or recycling by vehicle, and would contribute to emissions 
associate with vehicle exhausts outlined above.  
Shale gas can be classed as either ‘wet’ or ‘dry’.  While both gases contain methane, wet gas contains small 
quantities of hydrocarbons such as ethane and butane.  These additional hydrocarbons can be captured and 
sold, however they are associated with higher emissions of VOCs, for example through venting hydrocarbon 
storage tanks.  The extent of emissions to air would depend on the nature and composition of shale gas at a 

                                                            
12 DECC (2014) Fracking UK Shale: Local Air Quality.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277219/Air.pdf [Accessed April 2015].   
13 Allen, D.T., et al (2013) Measurements of methane emissions at natural gas production sites in the United States, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 (44), 17768-17773.  Available from 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1304880110 [Accessed November 2014].  
14 DECC (2014) The Government’s Response to the MacKay-Stone Report: Potential greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale 
Gas Extraction and Use.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/305811/140424_MacKay_Stone_Response_.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
15 Environment Agency (2012) Monitoring and control of fugitive methane from unconventional gas operations.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/291523/scho0812buwk-e-e.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.6 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

particular drilling location.  Emissions from oil tanks can also result in VOCs releases.16  Emissions of 
methane and VOCs from storage tanks can occur through: 

  Working losses – gas vapours at the top of the tank are expelled as additional liquid is added to 

the tank; 

  Breathing losses – from volatilisation of hydrocarbons due to external temperature changes; and 
  Flashing losses – arising when a liquid containing dissolved gases is transferred to a container 

with lower pressure, allowing gases to vaporise.15  

Fugitive emissions to air may also occur as a result of fuel spillage from plant and equipment, however this 
could be controlled through normal industrial spill prevention and response procedures and would be 
common to any similar construction activity.  A 2011 MIT study of gas well drilling in the US found that a third 
of documented incidents between 2005 and 2009 related to accidental spills and leaks.17  The scale of 
vehicle movements involved may also result in a potential increase in the risk of spillages and associated 
emissions to air as a result of road accidents.   
Emissions to air in the US have particularly been the cause for concern due to reports of poor health in the 
vicinity of shale gas operations and air quality monitoring identifying harmful and carcinogenic substances.  
The situation in the US is not considered to be repeated in the UK and Europe due to EU limits on the use 
and emissions of harmful substances.18 

Production Development 
Activities which give rise to adverse effects on air quality at this Stage would be similar to Stage 2.  These 
include: 

  Groundworks from expanding the wellpad and associated dust generation; 
  Deliveries to the site to deliver equipment and plant; 

  Drilling equipment powered by diesel or other forms of combustion engines; 
  Deliveries of water (if not connected to mains supplies); 
  Deliveries of materials used in the fracturing fluid (other than raw water); 

  Fracturing fluid pumps; and 
  Removal of cuttings and spent drilling muds. 

In addition, the well may be re-fractured again in the future, which would result in further emissions of 
methane and other gases as outlined in Stage 2. 

Bringing multiple wells per pad into production would cause a medium term continuation of the activities 
outlined above.  As these activities would result in emissions from several different sources, it is possible that 
there would be a strong and sustained localised negative effect on communities and biodiversity closest to 
the wellpads resulting from a significant increase in air pollution and particulate deposition.  
The key pollutants released at this stage are particulate matter, NOX, SO2, CO and VOCs. 

                                                            
16 Public Health England (2014) Review of the Potential Public Health Impacts of Exposures to Chemical and Radioactive Pollutants as 
a Result of the Shale Gas Extraction Process.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/329744/PHE-CRCE-002_for_website_protected.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
17  MIT (2011) The Future of Natural Gas: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study, as cited in RSBP (2014) Hydraulic Fracturing for Shale Gas in 
the UK.  Available from http://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/shale_gas_report_evidence_tcm9-365779.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
18 European Parliament (2011) Impacts of shale gas and shale oil extraction on the environment and on human health.  Available from 
http://europeecologie.eu/IMG/pdf/shale-gas-pe-464-425-final.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.7 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Once the wells are operational, there is a risk that there would be ongoing fugitive emissions of methane and 
other trace hydrocarbons via leakages from values, flanges, compressors etc.  Evidence from the US also 
suggests that gases such as methane could leak from the well during production due to loss of well 
integrity.19  However, there is insufficient evidence to conclude the likelihood or quantities of gases that may 
be released (although it is expected to be minor, if at all).  Furthermore, it is assumed that regular well 
integrity testing would prevent or mitigate against any loss of well integrity. 
As under Stage 3, methane can be emitted from unconventional gas extraction during the re-fracturing stage 
to stimulate the flow of shale gas again.  In the US, the frequency of refracturing is not certain and is 
estimated to be once per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  AEA reports that it is uncertain whether the US 
approach is transferable to Europe, with an expected potential for wells to be refractured once every 10 
years and a potential maximum well lifetime of 10 to 40 years for European operations.1  Given the lack of 
data for well lifetimes and the large numbers of wells in the US that have been shut down within 10 years, 
the life span of wells is not certain at this time and estimates of up to 40 years may be optimistic.20  For each 
refracturing event, air emissions would arise as per the original fracturing process, such as release of vehicle 
and plant emissions, release of methane, leakages and dust generation from proppant handling. 

By this stage, it is anticipated that water pipelines would be connected to the site to provide water and 
remove waste water from the fracturing process.  This would substantially reduce vehicle movements and 
associated exhaust emissions compared to exploration and test stages where water may be tankered on and 
off site.  Infrastructure to collect gas released from the fracturing fluid may also be in place to collect and 
export the gas.  Additionally, if a power connection is in place on the site during long-term production, 
emissions from diesel generators to pump fracturing fluid into the well may no longer arise.  Additionally, if 
not in place at the exploration stage, it is expected that appropriate infrastructure for the capture and export 
of gas released from flowback fluid would be installed to reduce emissions to air. 
Transportation of materials and equipment and wastes from the site during the production and maintenance 
phase is expected to be minimal in the most part.  However, re-fracturing would result in the need for HGV 
movements to deliver water, chemicals to site.   This increase in vehicle movement may generate emissions 
from vehicles alongside local transport networks within rural areas.  However, given the short term nature of 
this work, this is not expected to be significant. 
Across the lifetime of a well, a study in the US has estimated 4 - 8% of methane from shale gas production is 
released into the atmosphere from venting and fugitive emissions (where venting is permitted).21  However, 
in part this will represent emission estimates based on historical practice (so excluding green completions).  
The wider applicability of this study’s findings to the UK and Europe is not certain due geological and 
operational differences; however, it is indicative of the scale and risks arising from venting and fugitive 
emissions.   
More seriously, well blow-outs can result in large scale, uncontrolled releases of fluids and gases.  The total 
scale of losses is not known, however this could still contribute to atmospheric emissions and local 
pollution.1  Examples of incidents in the US include a release of 132,000 litres of wastewater and natural gas 
due to a blow-out, and accidental ignition of fracturing fluid resulting in 33m high flames.  These resulted 
from incorrect operation and behaviour, so could be minimised through regulation, monitoring and training.18  
While potentially a major hazard, blowouts are rare and are would be expected to be unlikely in the UK or 
elsewhere where the permeability of the host formation (shale) is very low.  This means that even if the rock 
formation is over-pressurised, it does not easily result in a sudden escape of fluids due to the lack of mobility 
of the fluid.  Blow-outs are more likely to occur in shallower and more permeable formations.22  Blow-out 

                                                            
19 Ingraffea, A. (2012) Fluid Migration Mechanisms Due to Faulty Well Design and/or Construction: An overview and Recent 
Experiences in the Pennsylvania and Marcellus Play. Available from http://www.fraw.org.uk/files/extreme/ingraffea_2013.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 
20 Hughes, J.D. (2014) Drilling Deeper: A Reality Check on U.S. Government Forecasts for a Lasting Tight Oil & Shale Gas, Post 
Carbon Institute.   
21 Howarth, R.W., Santoro, R. and Ingraffea, A. (2011) Methane and the greenhouse-gas footprint of natural gas from shale formations, 
Climatic Change, 106 (4), 679-690.  Available from http://www.acsf.cornell.edu/Assets/ACSF/docs/attachments/Howarth-EtAl-2011.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
22 Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing.  Available from 
https://royalsociety.org/policy/projects/shale-gas-extraction/report/ [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.8 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

preventers should be fitted on all wells to automatically shut down flows in the event of an uncontrolled 
escape, and the well casing and cement must also be strong enough to contain the subsequent underground 
build up of pressure in the well.   
Although there would still be activities occurring on site which would have adverse effects on air quality, the 
scale of activities would be considerably lower at this stage.  Minor negative effects would be expected as 
the low level emission of certain pollutants over a long period of time may cause depositions that impact on 
certain habitats or other vulnerable receptors. 
Overall, emissions to air from shale gas wells are considered to be relatively low across the development, 
fracturing and operational stages.  However, more significant cumulative effects may arise if there are a 
number of wells in a small area.16  Additionally, the sensitivity of the local area and nearby receptors, plus 
existing background levels of air pollutants, would all affect the significance of air emissions in a particular 
location. 

Decommissioning of wells 
The decommissioning of an unconventional gas well would be generally similar to the process used for a 
conventional oil and gas.  
Activities which may affect local air quality would be primarily associated with vehicle movements to and from 
the site to removal plant, equipment, wastes and other materials.  The total number of movements would be 
uncertain at this stage, however, it is assumed likely to be of a smaller scale than that in Stage 2 (given that 
there would be no drilling activities or associated vehicle movements) and not a significant contribution to air 
quality.   

The plugging of the well would require some construction related activities but these would be of a small 
scale and short term in duration.   
Evidence from the US suggests that gases such as methane could leak from the well during production due 
to loss of well integrity.23  However, there is insufficient evidence to conclude the likelihood or quantities of 
gases that may be released (although it is expected to be minor, if at all).  Furthermore, it is assumed that 
regular well integrity testing would prevent or mitigate against any loss of well integrity. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 
The restoration of the site would involve a similar level of activity required to prepare the pad site.  Large 
plant and machinery would be expected to be on site for removal of the well pad and access track, and there 
would be movements of earth and soil.  This may give rise to dust depending on ground conditions, soil 
types and recent rainfall patterns and localised vehicle emissions. 
Fugitive emissions could arise in the event of inadequate sealing of the well.  Current design and 
construction standards should limit releases, but the eventual scale of loss is uncertain across the long term 
period after abandonment, considered across several hundred years.  This is, however, expected to be of 
similar scale to fugitive emissions from conventional wells, with only minor amounts of gas expected to 
continue to be released to air if appropriately designed and constructed.1  

4.3  

Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 1, 2, 4, 7, 10, 12, 16, 18, 22, 24  

 

                                                            
23 Ingraffea, A. (2012).  
24 AEA (2012) Climate Impact of Potential Shale Gas Production in the EU, Issue 2.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/eccp/docs/120815_final_report_en.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.9 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  Vehicles and machinery should shut down their engines when stationary or not in use to reduce 

emissions; 

  Transport  Plans could  reduce  the  amount  of  trips made  or  the mileage  that  vehicles  need  to 

complete; and 

  Low Emissions Vehicles should be used where possible. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Air emission specifications should be considered during all equipment selection and procurement.  
  Where possible, low or ‘zero’ sulphur fuels should be used for the engines of drilling rigs and 

fracturing equipment.  

  Vehicles and machinery should shut down their engines when stationary or not in use to reduce 

emissions. 

  Consider the use of low emission vehicles or HGVs conforming to the highest available standards 

for vehicle emissions. 

  Develop a transport plan to reduce HGV traffic (for example through load sharing); designate 
parking and storage areas; and identify appropriate transport routes and times e.g. avoiding peak 
traffic hours to minimise congestion and idling emissions. 

  Local sources of materials, personnel, equipment and waste disposal can help reduce vehicle 

movements to the site. 

  Connection to water supplies and wastewater infrastructure can reduce requirements to tanker 

water to and from site, reducing emissions from vehicles.   

  If there is no water supply available, consider treatment and reuse of fracturing fluid to reduce 

water deliveries.  

  If flaring is the only option available for the disposal of test gases, only the minimum volume of 
hydrocarbons required for the test should be flowed and well test durations should be reduced to 
the extent practical.  Volumes of hydrocarbons flared should be recorded.  This could include the 
use of an enclosed flare or other method to ensure waste gas is oxidised.  In order to reduce air 
pollution,  the  method  of  flaring  should  be  selected  to  minimise  incomplete  combustion,  black 
smoke and hydrocarbon fallout.  

  If  available,  use  a  mains  electricity  supply  rather  than  diesel  or  petrol  generators  to  reduce 

emissions to air.  Alternatively, use battery powered equipment if practical. 

  Where diesel drilling or fracturing equipment is in use, three-way catalytic converters can help 

reduce pollutant emissions. 

  A Dust Suppression Plan could reduce the levels of dust that are caused by ground works.  The 
scale  of  the  management  plan  would  generally  be  dependent  on  local  conditions  and  the 
presence of sensitive receptors. 

  Implement good site management practices to help mitigate dust issues.  This should include 
displaying  contact  information  for  the  site;  recording  all  dust  and  air  quality  complaints  and 
measures taken to reduce emissions; and recording unusual incidents and the actions taken to 
resolve incidents.    

  Where receptors are located nearby, undertake daily site and off site inspections (including local 
roads) to monitor and record dust levels.  Conduct inspections more frequently when carrying out 
dusty activities or in dry/windy conditions. 

  Consider site layout in advance, so that machinery, dusty activities and site access routes are 

situated as far as possible from nearby receptors. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.10 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Conduct off site air quality monitoring and use the results to inform site practices.  This should 
include monitoring in advance of site development and drilling works, so that baseline levels and 
impacts from operations can be determined. 

  Cover exposed soil and vehicle routes as soon as possible. 
  Ensure that vehicles entering or leaving the site are covered to prevent dust escaping during 
transport (if containing dusty material such as aggregates), and use road sweepers and wheel 
washers to avoid tacking dust and mud off site. 

  Consider erecting screens to act as windbreaks or dust screens around particularly dusty activity 
areas, such as handling the proppant.  Screens should be as high as any stockpiles.  Landscaping 
around the site may also provide some screening. 

  Keep fences, barriers, scaffolding and screens clean using wet methods. 
  Ensure  that  fine  powder  materials  such  as  cement  are  delivered  and  stored  in  enclosed 

containers, with control systems to prevent escape or overfilling during delivery.   

  Seal or cover any dusty materials that are not currently in use on the site.  Sand or aggregates 
may  be  stored  in  a  bunded  area  and  sprayed  with  water  to  suppress  dust.    Remove  dusty 
materials from the site when no longer needed.   

  Ensure  that  dust  generating  equipment  such  as  cutting,  grinding  or  sawing  is  used  with 

appropriate dust suppression such as water sprays or local exhaust ventilation systems (LEV). 

  Spray or damp down dusty areas to suppress dust movement, using non-potable water where 

possible.  Avoid dry sweeping large areas. 

  Do not vent emissions from flowback fluid directly to atmosphere, except for safety reasons. 
  Gases released from flowback fluid should be separated and collected for use or sale where 
possible  (‘green  completions’), which  may  not  be  feasible  during  initial  exploratory  stages.    If 
collection is not possible, use enclosed flares.  Flaring within a burn chimney can increase the 
height of emissions and improve dispersion of pollutants. 

  If produced water collects in the well and requires expulsion from the well to maintain gas flow 
rates, reduce the release of gaseous emissions through the use of a plunger lift system.  This 
uses a plunger within the well to control the gradual release of fluids and gases for separation at 
the surface. 

  Control emissions from storage tanks through the use of vapour recovery units, transfer of gases 

to pipelines or flaring. 

  Reduce  emissions  from  glycol  dehydrators  by  using  vapour  recovery  units,  zero  emissions 
dehydrators  with  pipe,  valve  and  pump  modifications,  desiccant  dehydrators  (using  salts  to 
remove water) and flash tank separators.  

  Emissions from pneumatic devices can be reduced through the use of low bleed devices and 
intensive maintenance of equipment such as liquid level controllers, pressure regulators and valve 
controllers.  Maintenance should include cleaning and tuning, and repairing or replacing leaking 
gaskets, tubing fittings and seals. 

  Compressor emissions can be controlled by using dry seals rather than wet seals in centrifugal 
compressors, and periodic replacement of rod packing systems in reciprocating-rod compressors.  
Avoid depressurising the compressor system (blowdown) which can result in large natural gas 
losses. 

  A rigorous equipment maintenance regime should be in place to help reduce incidents of failure 

or leaks, including plant such as compressors, pumps and pipe joints. 

  Implement a leak detection and repair regime to help reduce fugitive emissions when leaks occur. 

 

   

April 2015 

  B4.11 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Utilise a blowout preventor (BOP) to shut down fluid flow in the event of unexpected well blow-

out. 

Production Development 

  Air quality monitoring should be carried out on a continuous basis during this stage.  While this 
will not prevent air pollution per se, it will allow for early identification of any potential significant 
effects. 

  Air emission specifications should be considered during all equipment selection and procurement. 
  Vehicles and machinery could shut down their engines when stationary or not in use to reduce 

emissions. 

  A Dust Suppression Plan could reduce the levels of dust that are caused by ground works. 

  Implement  reduced  emissions  completions  (RECs),  also  known  as  ‘green  completions’,  to 
separate water, sand and gas from flowback water and sell or use the collected gas to reduce 
flaring, once infrastructure for this is in place. 

Production/operation/maintenance  

  Regular testing of well integrity during the production lifecycle.   

  Due to the uncertainty of emissions to air during production due to well leakage it is suggested 
that air quality monitoring should be carried out on a continuous basis during this stage.  While 
this will not prevent air pollution per se, it will allow for early identification of leakages/loss of well 
integrity. 

  Consider the use of natural-gas fired rather than diesel equipment, particularly at later stages or 

refracturing, when gas may be available on site. 

  Implement a regime of regulation, monitoring and staff training for correct operation and behaviour 

to help reduce the risk of accidents and blow-outs. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  Transport Plans should be drafted up to reduce the number of trips required to remove materials 

and plant from the site. 

  Low Emission Vehicles should be used if possible. 
  Due to the uncertainty of emissions to air after production due to well leakage it is suggested that 
air quality monitoring should be carried out.  While this will not prevent air pollution, per se, it will 
allow for early identification of leakages/loss of well integrity. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  Dust suppressions practices should be adopted where necessary. 
  Undertake  periodic  air  monitoring  e.g.  every  few  years  to  detect  possible  well  failure  after 

abandonment.  

4.4  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The Air Quality Framework Directive 96/62/EC and its Daughter Directives set a framework for monitoring 
and reporting levels of air pollutants across EU member states, setting limits or reductions for certain air 
pollutants.   

   

April 2015 

  B4.12 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The Ambient Air Quality and Cleaner Air for Europe Directive 2008/50/EC consolidated earlier air quality 
directives and also defines and establishes objectives and targets for ambient air quality to avoid, prevent or 
reduce harmful effects on human health and the environment as a whole.  It sets legally binding limits for 
concentrations in outdoor air of major air pollutants that impact on public health such as particulate matter 
(PM10 and PM2.5) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2).  The 2008 directive replaced nearly all the previous EU air 
quality legislation and was made law in England through the Air Quality Standards Regulations 2010, 
which also incorporates the 4th air quality daughter directive 2004/107/EC that sets targets for levels in 
outdoor air of certain toxic heavy metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.  Equivalent regulations exist 
in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. 
The UK monitors and models air quality to assess compliance with the air quality limit and target values set 
out in the EU legislation above.  The results of the assessment are reported to the Commission on an annual 
basis.  Air quality monitoring is also carried out by local authorities to meet local air quality management 
objectives. 
The National Emissions Ceilings Directive 2001/81/EC came into force in 2001, and Member States were 
required to transpose it into their national legislation by November 2002.  This Directive set ‘ceilings’ 
(maximum values to be achieved by 2010) for total national emissions of four pollutants: sulphur dioxide; 
oxides of nitrogen; volatile organic compounds; and ammonia.  These four pollutants contribute to 
acidification, eutrophication, and formation of ground level ozone.  This is transposed into UK legislation in 
the National Emissions Ceiling Regulations 2002. 
Following a review of EU air quality policy, the EU published the Clean Air Policy Package in 2013 with new 
proposals on ambient air quality and emissions ceilings.  The package includes a new Clean Air Programme 
for Europe (2013), which sets out new air policy objectives for 2030 to reduce health impacts and 
eutrophication in ecosystems.  The package will also involve revisions to the National Emissions Ceiling 
Directive.  
The EU Thematic Strategy on Air Quality (2005) identifies that despite significant improvements in air 
quality across the EU, a number of serious air quality issues still persist.  The strategy promotes an 
approach, which focuses upon the most serious pollutants, and that more is done to integrate environmental 
concerns into other policies and programmes.  The objective of the strategy is to attain levels of air quality 
that do not give rise to significant negative impacts on and risks to human health and the environment.  The 
strategy emphasises the need for a shift towards less polluting modes of transport and the better use of 
natural resources to help reduce harmful emissions. 
The Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) 2010/75/EU combines seven existing air pollution directives, 
including the Large Combustion Plant Directive and the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC) 
Directive.  As with previous directives aimed at minimising emission release, part of the benefit of the 
Industrial Emissions Directive is that it includes several new industrial processes, sets new minimum 
emission limit values (ELVs) for large combustion plant and addresses some of the implementation issues of 
the IPPC. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Directive 2011/92/EU aims for the environmental impacts from 
certain projects to be identified and for mitigation measures to be proposed.  Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) are not mandated for all shale gas operations and would be necessary when operations 
exceed 500,000m3 gas extraction or are deemed likely to have significant environmental impacts, which 
could include impacts from emissions to air, among others. 
The European Commission recommendation on minimum principles for the exploration and production of 
hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high volume hydraulic fracturing (2014) has been published to lay 
down minimum principles which should be taken into account by Member States when developing regulation 
for hydraulic fracturing.  The Recommendation acknowledges that EU legislation was not developed when 
hydraulic fracturing was occurring in Europe, and that certain environmental aspects, such as strategic 
planning, underground risk assessment, well integrity, baseline and operational monitoring, capturing 
methane emissions and disclosure of information on chemicals used on a well by well basis, may not be 
adequately covered in existing legislation.  The Recommendation sets out minimum principles for hydraulic 
fracturing which should complement existing legislation and specifies that these should be implemented by 
Member States within six months. 

   

April 2015 

  B4.13 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The Gothenburg Protocol to Abate Acidification, Eutrophication and Ground-level Ozone (1999) 
originally set emissions ceilings for 2010 for sulphur, NOx, VOCs and ammonia to reduce emissions across 
Europe.  Reductions were focussed in countries which would have the greatest environmental and health 
impacts and where emissions were relatively cheap to reduce.  The protocol has recently been extended 
with targets to 2020.  The Protocol also set limit values for emissions from sources such as combustion 
plant, cars and HGVs, electricity production, paint and aerosols, among others. 
Vehicle standards for pollutant emissions from road vehicles are set in the EU for light-duty and heavy-duty 
vehicles, the ‘Euro Standards’.  Light-duty vehicles such as cars and vans are currently restricted in 
particulate matter and NOx emissions from diesel under Euro 6, while large goods vehicles are limited on 
CO, NOx, hydrocarbon and particulate matter emissions to help improve air quality. 
The Non-Road Mobile Machinery Directive 97/68/EC and subsequent amendments up to 2012 address air 
pollution from diesel and spark emission engines from mobile plant such as excavators, bulldozers and 
compressors.  The aim is to progressively reduce polluting emissions of CO, NOx, hydrocarbons and 
particulate matter from mobile exhaust emissions.  This legislation applies to new machines only, and does 
not limit emissions during use.  In September 2014, the European Commission proposed simplified 
regulations with more stringent emission limit values. 

UK 
The Air Quality (Standards) Regulations 2010 transpose into UK law Directive 2008/50/EC on ambient air 
quality and cleaner air for Europe and Directive 2004/107/EC relating to arsenic, cadmium, mercury, nickel 
and polycyclicaromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air.  The objective of the Regulations is to improve air 
quality by reducing the impact of air pollution on human health and ecosystems.  The standards set out air 
quality objectives, limit values and target values for pollutants, namely benzene, 1,3 butadiene, carbon 
monoxide, lead, nitrogen dioxide, PM10, sulphur dioxide and PM25.   
The Air Quality Strategy for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland (2007) sets out a way 
forward for work and planning on air quality issues.  It sets out air quality objectives and policy options to 
improve air quality for the benefit of health and the environment. 
The Environment Act 1995 was enacted to protect and preserve the environment and guard against 
pollution to air, land or water.  It requires local authorities to undertake local air quality management (LAQM) 
assessments against the standards and objectives prescribed in regulations.  Where any of these objectives 
are not being achieved, local authorities must designate air quality management areas and prepare and 
implement remedial action plans to tackle the problem. 
Under the Environmental Protection Act 1990, local authorities can serve an Abatement Notice where a 
statutory nuisance exists, or is likely to occur or recur.  Statutory nuisances include: smoke, fumes or gases, 
dust, steam or smell or other effluvia arising from premises or development sites which are deemed to be 
prejudicial to health or a nuisance. 
The Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 sets up a pollution control regime.  
The environmental regulator would specify conditions for environmental permits, for example limiting the type 
and quantity of emissions released to air.  Extractive gases such as those released from flowback fluid are 
considered mining waste, so the site would need to provide a Waste Management Plan as part of the permit 
application for a mining waste operation.  The Plan must set out objectives to prevent or reduce the 
production of extractive waste; encourage recovery; and ensure safe disposal.  The permit may need to 
include areas designated for the deposit of waste gases as part of the mining waste facility.  An industrial 
emissions permit would also be required for operations that flare more than 10 tonnes of gas per day.   
Planning permission for hydraulic fracturing operations is required under the Town and Country Planning 
Act 1990.  In determining whether or not to grant planning permission, this would involve consideration of 
the effects from traffic and local air pollution, and the effects on the local environment and receptors.  
Planning permission and any planning conditions would be determined by the local Minerals Planning 
Authority, which would include local authorities (such as county or unitary council) in England, Wales and 
Scotland, and the Department of Environment in Northern Ireland, or the National Park Authority if 
operations are located in a National Park.  The National Planning Policy Framework is in place at a 

   

April 2015 

  B4.14 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

national level to set out the Government’s planning policies for England, and includes consideration of 
impacts on air quality. 
The Environmental Protection (Controls on Ozone Depleting Substances) Regulations 2011 introduces 
controls on the production, use and emissions from equipment of a large number of ‘controlled substances’ 
that deplete the ozone layer. 
Under the Sulphur Content of Liquid Fuels (England and Wales) Regulations 2007, there are restrictions 
of sulphur in gas oil and heavy fuel oil to help reduce emissions of sulphur dioxide to the atmosphere.  Gas 
oil is restricted to a maximum of 0.1% sulphur by mass, and heavy fuel oil to 1%. 
The Clean Air Act 1993 controls the release of 'dark smoke' from chimneys and industrial sites.  It also 
controls grit, dust and fumes from non-domestic furnaces and regulates chimney heights. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.1 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

5.  Climate Change 

5.1 

Introduction 

Climate change within the context of this review is concerned with increasing the likelihood of climate change 
effects through greenhouse gas emissions, and the ability to adapt to the effects of climate change such as 
the occurrence of more extreme weather events.   
There are links between climate change and other topics in the study, specifically biodiversity and nature 
conservation, water, human health and air.  

5.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on climate change arising from the potential 
activities that could arise in one of the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production.  Table B5.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and 
decommissioning. 

Table B5.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 

  Seismic surveys; 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development, including: 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 

  Provision of pipeline connections  
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

 

   

April 2015 

  B5.2 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B5.1(continued)   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

4 

5 

6 

 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 
 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Stage 1 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle would comprise non-intrusive 
activities.  Site identification, selection and characterisation and the securing of regulator approval would be 
expected to be largely desk-based and in consequence, no substantial effects on climate change would be 
anticipated from these activities. 
Seismic testing would be undertaken during this stage.  Vibroseis is a common method of seismic survey 
and typically involves 3-5 large truck mounted vibrator units which sub-sonically vibrate the ground while a 
number of support vehicles record the returning shock waves for analysis.  In some cases, shot-hole survey 
techniques may be used.  This involves the drilling of a hole with a small diameter for the insertion of 
explosives which are then detonated with the holes infilled after use. 
Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions will result from associated vehicle movements and the operation of 
machinery.  However, it is anticipated that the intensity of activity would be low and the associated number of 
vehicle movements would be small such that any effects on climate change are unlikely to be significant in a 
local or national context. 

There may be a requirement for the temporary construction of new roads to facilitate access to sites which 
could result in disturbance to soils and emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane together with loss of 
soil carbon sequestration.  However, it is assumed that land take would be relatively small and that any soils 
displaced during construction would be returned following the completion of works.  Further, alternatives to 
access track/road construction may be implemented such as the laying of protection mats that would 
minimise soil disturbance.  Notwithstanding, should significant new road infrastructure be required to 
facilitate site access then associated emissions may be more substantive. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.3 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
Like conventional oil and gas exploration, pad preparation and associated construction activities would 
generate GHG emissions.  Sources of emissions would include the direct or indirect combustion of fossil 
fuels from construction traffic, plant and generators and the embodied carbon within construction materials.  
Disturbance to soils and emissions of CO2 and methane together with loss of soil carbon sequestration may 
also contribute to climate change, although it is anticipated that sites would be restored following either 
completion of exploration drilling or decommissioning of wells such that effects would be reduced in longer 
term (i.e. following exploratory drilling or beyond the site restoration stage, depending on whether a site is 
taken forward to the production stage).  The exact magnitude of emissions related to pad preparation would 
be dependent on site specific characteristics such as requirements for infrastructure such as roads, the 
distance to be travelled by vehicles during the transportation of materials and wastes and the carbon content 
of soils.  A report by MacKay and Stone (2013) concerning potential greenhouse gas emissions associated 
with shale gas extraction and use1 estimates (based on median values of GHG emissions taken from a 
range of source data) that site preparation would generate 229 tCO2eq per well (taking into account GHG 
emissions during both stages 2 and 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle).     
GHG emissions would also be generated from the energy used in the drilling of boreholes, the volume of 
which would depend on the depth and length of drilling required and the number of wells drilled.  There 
would also be additional emissions associated with transportation and treatment of wastes (e.g. mud and 
cuttings) arising from drilling activities and from the embodied carbon associated with well construction 
(associated with the casing and cementation).  However, Broderick et al (2011) highlight that the initial 
drilling stages would be similar to conventional oil and gas such that the level of emissions generated would 
be comparable2.  In the case of a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England3, 
the operator (Cuadrilla) has estimated that emissions associated with drilling across four wells would 
constitute 9.5% of all project emissions (11,592 tCO2eq).   
The hydraulic fracturing process is usually powered by large, diesel-fired internal combustion engines.  A 
report by AEA (2012) concerning the climate impact of potential shale gas production in the EU states that 
more energy is required to fracture the formation than required to drill the wellbore4 (although alternative 
lighter fuels or electricity could be used).  However, Cuadrilla has estimated that hydraulic fracturing would 
generate only 2.3% of all project emissions (3,581 tCO2eq) (compared to estimated emissions of 11,592 
tCO2eq during drilling) in respect of their proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire5.  
Additional emissions are generated by the hydraulic fracturing process due to the requirement for the 
transportation and treatment of large volumes of water, sand and chemicals for the proppant fluids, as well 
as from the embodied carbon in the chemicals themselves and other additional construction materials (e.g. 
well casing).   
The exact volume of GHG emissions associated with hydraulic fracturing activities depends upon a number 
of factors including the length of the well bore, quantities of water and other chemicals required for fracturing, 
treatment and transportation requirements.  MacKay and Stone (2013) estimate that drilling and hydraulic 
fracturing operations during the pre-production phase (i.e. stages 2 and 3 of the unconventional oil and gas 
exploration and production lifecycle for the purposes of this review) would generate 711 tCO2eq per well.  
This is based on median values of GHG emissions taken from a range of data sources where the maximum 
value reported was 1,790 tCO2eq per well.  Indirect emissions associated with the transportation of water 
                                                            
1 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/237330/MacKay_Stone_shale_study_report_09092013.p
df [Accessed April 2015]. 
2Broderick. J., et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts. A report commissioned by 
The Co-operative and undertaken by researchers at the Tyndall Centre, University of Manchester.  Available from 
http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
3 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement.  Available 
from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed April 
2015]. 
4 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbon operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe.  Available from http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.4 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

(including wastewater transport and treatment) are estimated to be 21 tCO2eq per well and the embodied 
carbon in chemicals 300 tCO2eq. 
AEA (2012) and MacKay and Stone (2013) state that well completion is likely to be the main source of GHG 
emissions during the pre-production phase.  Following the completion of hydraulic fracturing, a combination 
of fracturing fluid and water is returned to the surface (flowback) which includes methane.  MacKay and 
Stone (2013) estimate GHG emissions associated with well completion to be 2,788 tCO2eq per well (during 
stages 2 and 3) based on the median values of GHG emissions from a range of source data and assuming 
that 90% of methane emissions released during flowback are captured and flared.  However, it should be 
noted that estimates of the volume of gas released during well completion vary significantly.  In this respect, 
the maximum emissions cited in the MacKay and Stone (2013) report (assuming again that 90% of methane 
emissions released during flowback are captured and flared) is 8,469 tCO2eq per well.  In the case of a 
proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England5, meanwhile, the operator (Cuadrilla) 
has estimated that emissions associated with flaring across four wells would be approximately 89,000 
tCO2eq (to be captured under the EU Emissions Trading Scheme).   
Alongside geology and well productivity, the method of well completion is a key factor in influencing levels of 
GHG emissions.  Gas generated during well completion may be flared (i.e. combusted in an open flame), 
cold vented or captured/recovered (known as reduced emissions completion (REC) or green completions1).  
Broderick et al (2011) outline a number of factors that may impact upon the potential for gas to be vented, 
flared or processed, including: 

  The potential for gas to be contaminated; 

  Inconsistent and low flow rates; 
  Levels of methane dissolved in flowback water (open pit collection necessarily allows this gas to 

be released to the atmosphere, enclosed tanks afford the opportunity of collection for flaring); 
and 

  Regulatory requirements (in the UK, for example, flaring is regulated by the Department of 

Energy and Climate Change (DECC) as part of a licence condition and it is DECC’s established 
policy that flaring should be reduced to the economic minimum)6. 

Venting would be expected to generate the highest volume of emissions as gas would be directly released to 
the atmosphere.  In the UK, venting is not permitted unless necessary for safety reasons.  With regard to 
flaring, Broderick et al (2011) highlight that this method reduces climate change impacts by converting 
methane and other volatile organic compounds (VOCs) to CO2, although it may cause local environmental 
impacts.  Green completions (or REC), meanwhile, usually involve the use of portable equipment which 
consists of a skid or trailer, mounted set of piping connections and vessels that include a plug catcher, a 
sand trap and a three phase separator.  The plug catcher is connected to the wellhead and is used to 
remove any large solids from the drilling and completion.  The sand trap removes finer solids present in the 
production stream, while the three phase separator removes water and condensate from the gas.  Liquid 
hydrocarbons may be collected during completion and sold for additional revenue.  Water is typically stored 
in water tanks or in a reserve impoundment for later treatment or disposal.  If necessary, captured gas may 
enter a portable dehydrator at the well site or it may be routed to a permanent glycol dehydration unit in the 
gathering system, if one is available at or near the site, to remove heavy moisture from the gas before it 
enters the sales pipeline7.   

Tyner and Johnson’s (2014) analysis8 of industry-reported well activity and production data for Alberta in 
2011 highlights that green completions were used at approximately 53% of wells completed, and in other 
cases the majority (99.5%) of flowback gases were flared rather than vented.  In the US, operators will be 
                                                            
5 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014). 
6 AMEC (2013) Strategic Environmental Assessment for Further Onshore Oil and Gas Licensing: Environmental Report.  Prepared on 
behalf of the Department of Energy and Climate Change.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/273997/DECC_SEA_Environmental_Report.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
7 IPIECA (2013) Green Completions.  Available from http://www.ipieca.org/energyefficiency/solutions/78161 [Accessed November 2014]. 
8 Tyner, D.R. and Johnson, M.R. (2014) Emission Factors for Hydraulically Fractured Gas Wells Derived Using Well- and Battery-level 
Reported Data for Alberta, Canada, in Environmental Science and Technology 2014, 48, 14772−14781.  Available from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25402949 [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.5 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

required (from 2015) to use green completions under the Environment Protection Agency’s (EPA) 2012 oil 
and gas standards (during a transitional period that ends in January 2015 they will have the option to flare)9.  
Additionally, the US Natural Gas STAR Programme encourages oil and natural gas companies to adopt 
proven, cost-effective technologies and practices that improve operational efficiency and reduce methane 
emissions including in respect of well completion.  The STAR Programme has been subsequently expanded 
internationally10.  

In its review of completions and associated gas11, the US EPA (2014) highlights that the effectiveness of 
green completions can vary according to reservoir characteristics and other parameters including length of 
completion, number of fractured zones, pressure, gas composition and fracturing technology/technique  The 
review notes that a number of limitations exist for performing green completions, including: 

  Proximity of pipelines for the sale of captured gas; 
  Pressure of produced gas (which may not be sufficient to overcome the sales backline 

pressure); and 

  Inert gas concentration (which may exceed sales line concentration limits). 

Notwithstanding, the US EPA report indicates that a reduction in emissions of 90% has been estimated 
(based on data for more than 12,000 well completions) and that any amount of gas that cannot be recovered 
can be directed to a completion combustion device in order to achieve a minimum 95% reduction in 
emissions compared to venting.  The review also highlights a range of emerging technologies for controlling 
emissions including liquefaction of natural gas, natural gas liquids recovery, gas reinjection and electricity 
generation.  Emissions measurements for 27 well completions in the US reported by Allen et al (2013), 
meanwhile, range from less than 0.01 megagram (Mg) of methane (0.25 tCO2eq) to more than 17 Mg (6,375 
tCO2eq), with an average value of 1.7 Mg (42.5 tCO2eq)12.  They note that well completions with the lowest 
emissions (i.e. those completion events where 99% of potential emissions were captured or controlled) were 
those in which the flowback from the well was sent immediately to a separator and all of the gases from the 
separator were sent to sales.  MacKay and Stone (2013) also note that if 100% of methane released during 
flowback was captured and injected into the grid (if grid connection was available at this stage) there would 
be no emissions associated with well completion.   

A further source of GHG emissions are unintentional methane leaks (known as fugitive emissions).  The 
work of Jackson et al (2013), amongst others, highlights that a potential source of fugitive emissions could 
also be from gas that has escaped into aquifers as a result of poor well construction during drilling, 
production or after abandonment13 and through soil14  In the US, for example, Vidic et al (2013) derived a 
figure of 3.4% well leakage based on data from the Department of Environmental Protection15.  From a UK 
perspective, MacKay and Stone (2013) consider there to be sufficient regulations in place that leakage of 
gas into aquifers is unlikely to occur whilst the risk of contamination as a result of the hydraulic fracturing 
process is widely regarded to be low in Europe due to the likely distance between the fractures and 
aquifers16 (the potential for leakage of gas into aquifers is considered further in Appendix B.3 Water and 
                                                            
9 EPA (2012) Oil and Natural Gas Sector: New Source Performance Standards and National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air 
Pollutants Reviews; Final  Rule.  Available from http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2012-08-16/pdf/2012-16806.pdf [Accessed November 
2014]. 
10 For further information see US EPA (2015) Natural Gas STAR Programme.  Available from http://www.epa.gov/gasstar/basic-
information/index.html [Accessed November 2014]. 
11 US EPA (2014) Oil and Natural Gas Sector Hydraulically Fractured Oil Well Completions and Associated Gas during Ongoing 
Production: Report for Oil and Natural Gas Sector Oil Well Completions and Associated Gas during Ongoing Production Review Panel.  
Available from http://www.epa.gov/airquality/oilandgas/2014papers/20140415completions.pdf [Accessed November 2014]. 
12 Allen, D.T., Torres, V.M., Thomas, J., Sullivan, D.W., Harrison, M. Hendler, A., Herndon, S.C., Kolb, C.E., Fraser, M.P., Hill, D. Lamb, 
B.K. Miskimins, J., Sawyer, R.F. and Seinfeld, J.H. (2013) Measurements of methane emissions at natural gas production sites in the 
United State.  PNAS (2013) published ahead of print September 16, 2013, doi:10.1073/pnas.1304880110.  Available from 
http://www.pnas.org/content/110/44/17768.abstract [Accessed April 2015]. 
13 Jackson et al (2013) Increased stray gas abundance in a subset of drinking water wells near Marcellus shale gas extraction, PNAS, 
110 (28), 11250-11255. Available from http://www.pnas.org/content/110/28/11250.short [Accessed November 2014]. 
14 Teasdale, J.C.Hall, J.A. Martin, J.P. Manning, D.A.C. (2014) Ground Gas Monitoring: Implications for Hydraulic Fracturing and 
CO2 Storage.  Environmental Science and Technology 2014, 48, 13610−13616.  Available from 
http://pubs.acs.org/doi/pdf/10.1021/es502528c [Accessed April 2015]. 
15 Vidic et al. (2013) Impact of shale gas development on regional water quality.  Science 17 May 2013:  Vol. 340 no. 6134 1235009.  
Available from http://www.sciencemag.org/content/340/6134/1235009.abstract [Accessed April 2015]. 
16 AEA (2012). 

   

April 2015 

  B5.6 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Flood Risk).  However, based on monitoring data obtained from landfill sites in the UK, Teasdale et al 
(2014)14 conclude that atmospheric pressure is a key influence on gas movement.  As atmospheric pressure 
varies over time the implication for shale gas exploration and production is that there is a high likelihood of 
monitoring missing an emission event.  In consequence, they highlight a potential need for longer statutory 
monitoring in order to identify any longer-term seasonal variations in the ground gas regime17.  
In its review of oil and gas sector leaks, the US EPA (2014) identifies a number of technologies currently in 
use to detect leaks including analyser, optical gas imaging cameras, soap solution, acoustic leak detection, 
ambient monitors and electronic screening devices18.  The US Natural Gas STAR Programme has 
recommended a number of technologies and practices designed to reduce leakage19 whilst from a UK 
perspective, United Kingdom Onshore Oil and Gas (UKOOG) guidelines20 set out good practice in 
minimising fugitive emissions, stating (p.31):    

“Operators should plan and then implement controls in order to minimise all emissions.  Operators 
should be committed to eliminating all unnecessary flaring and venting of gas and to implementing 
best practices from the early design stages of the development and by endeavouring to improve on 
these during the subsequent operational phases.” 

Reflecting this guidance, the operator of a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, 
England21 has indicated that a range of measures are to be implemented to control fugitive emissions, 
including: 

  The appropriate maintenance of equipment and pipework; 
  Hydrostatic pressure testing of all equipment and pipework used to process or move gas around 

the site to identify potential leaks; 

  The use of an enclosed completions system to enable gas to be burnt via flare instead of being 

vented from tanks for lagoons; and 

  Regular fugitive emissions monitoring. 

The operator in this instance estimates that these measures are expected to achieve a 97-98% reduction in 
fugitive emissions (total fugitive emissions have been calculated as approximately 16,000 tCO2eq across 
four wells). 

Climate Change Impacts 
Construction and exploration could be affected by climate change where sites are located, for example, in 
coastal areas that may be affected by coastal inundation or sea level rise or in areas of flood risk that could 
be susceptible to extreme weather conditions.  This risk is similar to other types of development.   Climate 
change effects such as intensified weather events therefore have the potential to affect activities during 
Stage 2.  However, in view of the nature of the development and associated activities, together with the 
duration of the exploration stage (6 years under the initial term for the UK onshore Petroleum Exploration 
and Development Licence), it is not expected that associated activities would be substantially affected by the 
impacts of climate change.   
Given the requirement for hydraulic fracturing during this stage and associated water consumption 
(10,000m3 – 25,000m3 per well), there is the potential for activities to be both affected by climate change 
impacts on water resource availability and/or to affect future water resource availability, although this is 
dependent on existing and future local water resource availability (see Appendix B.3 Water and Flood Risk 
for further information in respect of the effects of shale gas operations on water resource availability). 
                                                            
17 Current UK practice is to take point measurements from all monitoring wells on a site for a minimum investigation period of 6 weeks. It 
is required that at least one of the point measurements needs to be taken during falling atmospheric pressure. 
18 US EPA (2014) Oil and Natural Gas Sector Leaks: Report for Oil and Natural Gas Sector Leaks Review Panel April 2014.  Available 
from http://www.epa.gov/airquality/oilandgas/2014papers/20140415leaks.pdf [Accessed November 2014]. 
19 For further information see US EPA (2015) Recommended Technologies and Practices.  Available from 
http://www.epa.gov/gasstar/tools/recommended.html [Accessed November 2014]. 
20 UKOOG (2013) UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines: Exploration and appraisal phase.  Available from 
http://www.ukoog.org.uk/images/ukoog/pdfs/ShaleGasWellGuidelines.pdf [Accessed November]. 
21 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014). 

   

April 2015 

  B5.7 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production Development 
The range and type of effects associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under Stage 2.  This stage would require additional 
infrastructure including storage tanks, road connections and the installation of pipelines required to collect 
natural gas for transfer to the existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure.  This would generate further GHG 
emissions associated with construction traffic, plant and generators and the embodied carbon within 
construction materials together with emissions of CO2 and methane associated with soil disturbance and loss 
of soil carbon sequestration which may contribute to climate change.  GHG emissions associated with the 
drilling of wells and fracturing would also be expected to be greater during this stage, reflecting the 
construction of additional wells.  However, for the purposes of this study, estimates of GHG emissions cover 
activities under both stages 2 and 3 and are therefore not repeated here to avoid double counting. 

As with Stage 2, construction could be affected by climate change where sites are located, for example, in 
coastal areas that may be affected by coastal inundation or sea level rise or in areas of flood risk that could 
be susceptible to extreme weather conditions.  Climate change effects such as intensified weather events 
therefore have the potential to affect activities during Stage 3.   

Production/operation/maintenance 

Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
During the production stage there would be GHG emissions associated with power generation and onsite 
combustion plant (e.g. generators) and from vehicle movements related to the transportation of maintenance 
workers and wastes to/from sites.  However, the AEA (2012) report concerning the climate impact of 
potential shale gas production in the EU states (at page 28) that “Since most of the emissions in this stage 
arise from equipment which would be used for conventional gas production, while there are significant 
emissions during the production stage, they are not significantly different from conventional gas production”.   
Like the exploratory stage, a further source of GHG emissions during this stage is likely to be fugitive 
methane and other trace hydrocarbons via leakages from on-site equipment including valves, flanges and 
compressors as well as from flaring and venting.  Across the lifetime of a well, a study in the US has 
estimated 4 - 8% of methane from shale gas production is released into the atmosphere from venting and 
fugitive emissions (where venting is permitted).22  Like AEA (2012), MacKay and Stone (2013) assume that 
GHG emissions from these sources would be similar to those associated with conventional gas production.  
From a UK perspective, the Digest of UK Energy Statistics estimates emissions associated with production 
and processing of conventional gas to be 100 tCO2e per million m3.  Based on MacKay and Stone’s central 
estimate of well productivity (estimated total of 85 million m3 over the 20 year lifetime of the wells23), it is 
assumed that total GHG emissions per well would be 8,500 tCO2e during production. 
An additional source of GHG emissions during this stage (compared to conventional oil and gas production) 
would be any re-fracturing required in order to stimulate the flow of shale gas.  In the US, the frequency of 
re-fracturing is not certain and is estimated to be once per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  For the 
purposes of their report, AEA (2012) assumed that a well would be re-fractured between 0 and 4 times over 
a well lifetime of up to 40 years.  This would generate additional GHG emissions similar to those noted in 
respect of hydraulic fracturing and well completion during stages 2 and 3 (on a per well basis) although as 
with stages 2 and 3, emissions are likely to vary depending on site specific characteristics and there may 
also be opportunities to reduce emissions depending on well completion methods.   

The accumulation of liquids in mature wells can impede and sometimes halt gas production.  When the 
accumulation of liquid results in the slowing or cessation of gas production, the removal of fluids is required 
in order to maintain production.  This is known as ‘liquid unloading’.  The US EPA (2014) states that 
emissions to the atmosphere during liquid unloading events are a potentially significant source of VOCs and 
note that the 2014 GHG Inventory estimates the 2012 liquids unloading emissions to be 14% of natural gas 
                                                            
22 Howarth, R.W., Santoro, R. and Ingraffea, A. (2011) Methane and the greenhouse-gas footprint of natural gas from shale formations, 
Climatic Change, 106 (4), 679-690.  Available from http://www.acsf.cornell.edu/Assets/ACSF/docs/attachments/Howarth-EtAl-2011.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
23 20 years represents the total licence period for Petroleum Exploration and Development Licences in the UK.  It should be noted that a 
well’s lifetime may extend beyond a 20 year period (up to around 40 years). 

   

April 2015 

  B5.8 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

production sector emissions in the US, although the majority of emissions from liquid unloading events come 
from a small percentage of wells with the length of time of each event and the frequency of events 
influencing the volume of emissions24.  The measurement of methane emissions from production sites in the 
US by Allen et al (2013) identified that methane emissions from nine unloading events in the US ranged from 
less than 0.02 Mg (0.5 tCO2eq) to 3.7 Mg (92.5 tCO2eq) with some wells being unloaded only once during 
their current life and others being unloaded monthly (the average emission per unloading event was 1.1 Mg 
of methane).   
The US EPA (2014) identify a number of technologies that have been developed to remove liquids from 
wells that generate fewer emissions (compared to blowdowns which involve shutting the well to allow bottom 
hole pressure to increase, then venting the well to the atmosphere) .  These technologies include well 
swabbing, velocity tubing and artificial lift.  Plunger lifts are the most common technology employed in the 
US, although the US EPA highlights that the emissions reduction efficiency plunger lifts can achieve varies 
greatly depending on how the system is operated.  
Indirectly, the combustion of extracted hydrocarbons would generate approximately 190 gCO2e/kWh (which 
represents combustion emissions for methane).  From a European perspective, the AEA (2012) review 
states that emissions from electricity generated from shale gas are 2-10% lower than electricity generated 
from conventional pipeline gas located outside of Europe (in Russia and Algeria), and 7-10% lower than 
electricity generated from LNG imported into Europe.  In a UK context, MacKay and Stone (2013) state that 
lifecycle emissions associated with shale gas (between 200 and 253 g CO2e per kWh(th)) are comparable to 
gas extracted from conventional sources (199-207 g CO2e per kWh(th)) and lower than LNG (233 – 270 g 
CO2e per kWh(th)) (assuming 90% of methane is captured and flared during well completion).  When shale 
gas is used for electricity generation, MacKay and Stone (2013) highlight that its carbon footprint is 
significantly lower than coal and point to US experience where a switch from coal to gas in electricity 
production has “significantly reduced the USA’s emissions rate”.   

However, recent literature has come to different conclusions regarding lifecycle GHG emissions from shale 
gas production and use relative to that of conventionally produced natural gas or other fuel sources such as 
coal25.  Brandt et al (2014)26 state that because of the high global warming potential of methane, which is a 
major component of natural gas, climate change benefits depend on system leakage rates.  Their review of 
published emissions estimates concludes that official inventories have underestimated methane emissions 
and that there is a poor understanding of excess methane, although they state that hydraulic fracturing is 
unlikely to be a dominant contributor to emissions.  A review of recent research concerning lifecycle GHG 
emissions from shale gas (and conventional gas) by Howarth (2014)27, meanwhile, highlights that shale gas 
and conventional natural gas have a larger GHG than coal or oil for both electricity and heat generation28.  
On balance, the more commonly accepted view presented in the literature reviewed as part of this study 
would seem to indicate that lifecycle GHG emissions from shale gas are less than those of other fossil fuels.  
In this regard, Heath et al (2014) have attempted to harmonize previously published estimates of lifecycle 
GHG emissions for shale gas, conventional gas and coal for electric power generation25.  They highlight that, 
even following harmonization, there remains variability in the results due to (inter-alia) gas type and play 
assessed, evaluation year and methane leakage rate.  Notwithstanding, they conclude that per unit electrical 
output, “the central tendency of current estimates of GHG emissions from shale gas-generated electricity 
indicates life cycle emissions less than half those from coal and roughly equivalent to those from 
conventional natural gas”.   

                                                            
24 US EPA (2014) Oil and Natural Gas Sector Liquids Unloading Processes: Report for Oil and Natural Gas Sector Liquids Unloading 
Processes Review Panel April 2014.  Available from http://www.epa.gov/airquality/oilandgas/2014papers/20140415liquids.pdf 
[Accessed November 2014]. 
25 Heath, G.A. O’Donoughue, P. Arent, D.J. and Bazilian, M. (2014) Harmonization of initial estimates of shale gas life cycle greenhouse 
gas emissions for electric power generation, in PNAS August 5, 2014  vol. 111 no. 31.  Available from 
http://www.pnas.org/content/111/31/E3167.abstract?tab=ds [Accessed April 2015]. 
26 Brandt, A.R. et al (2014) Methane Leaks from North American Natural Gas Systems, Science, Vol 343 14 February 2014.  Available 
from http://www.novim.org/images/pdf/ScienceMethane.02.14.14.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
27 Howarth, R.W. (2014) A bridge to nowhere: methane emissions and the greenhouse gas footprint of natural gas, Energy Science and 
Engineering 2014; 2(2): 47–60.  Available from 
http://www.eeb.cornell.edu/howarth/publications/Howarth_2014_ESE_methane_emissions.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
28 This conclusion is based on a 20-year time period for comparing the warming potential of methane to CO2 as opposed to 100 years 
which is commonly adopted in other life cycle assessments.  In Howarth’s opinion this reflects the fact that methane has an atmospheric 
lifetime of only 12 years or so, while CO2 has an effective influence on atmospheric chemistry for a century or longer. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.9 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The extent to which domestic production and consumption of shale gas would affect GHG emissions would 
vary subject to changes in prices affecting demand and supply relative to other sources of energy, national 
policy and legislation on energy and, in the long term, changes in investment in alternative supplies of gas 
and other energy sources.  In consequence, MacKay and Stone (2013 p29) conclude that the effects of 
shale gas use “will vary over time in ways that are challenging to predict”.  They also stress the need to 
consider the impact of shale gas production and consumption on global emissions and point to the fact that 
the switch to shale gas in the US has increased exports of coal, increasing the carbon intensity of energy 
production in other countries.  Further, it is also important to acknowledge that shale gas production and 
consumption could displace lower carbon energy sources.  In this respect, paragraph 159 of the UK Energy 
and Climate Change Committee (2011) report on shale gas states that “in planning to decarbonise the 
energy sector DECC should generally be cautious in its approach to natural gas.  Although gas emissions 
are less than coal they are higher than many lower carbon technologies”.   

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group 3 (2014) 5th Assessment Report29 
concludes that alongside the expansion of low-carbon technology deployment, fossil fuels will play a 
diminishing role in energy generation with unconventional gas having the potential to lower emissions for a 
transitional period where gas competes with coal (if fugitive emissions and energy requirements associated 
with hydraulic fracturing can be minimised).  In this context, a report by the UK Energy Research Centre 
(2014)30 assesses the extent to which natural gas has the potential to act as a ‘bridge’ to a low carbon future 
on both a global and regional basis out to 2050.  It concludes that there is a good potential for gas to act as a 
transition fuel up to 2035 but that this projection is subject to a number of conditions/caveats, including: 

  the role of gas as a transition fuel is time-limited - global gas consumption must decline in all 

years after 2035; 

  the absolute and relative increase in gas consumption must occur alongside a much greater 

reduction in coal consumption;  

  gas is only a short-term complement to the much larger increase in low-carbon energy sources 
that must occur to replace the reduction in coal consumption and for the low-carbon transition 
actually to be achieved;  

  carbon capture and storage (CCS) is of particular importance; and 
  gas is able to play a bridging role in some regions but not in others with more limited potential in 

Africa, Canada, Central and South America, the Middle East and Mexico.    

Climate Change Impacts 
Similar to stages 2 and 3, production could be affected by climate change.  Climate change effects such as 
intensified weather events therefore have the potential to affect activities during Stage 4, particularly given 
the fact that production would take place over a relatively long time frame (20 years) during which time the 
impacts of climate change (e.g. sea level rise) could become more pronounced.   
Given the likely requirement for re- fracturing during this stage and associated water consumption, there is 
the potential for activities to be both affected by climate change impacts on water resource availability and/or 
to affect future water resource availability, although this is dependent on existing and future local water 
resource availability.   

Decommissioning of wells 
Following production, wells must be properly closed with cement plugs and/or mechanical barriers in the 
wellbore to eliminate the pathway to the surface or freshwater sources.  The inadequate sealing of wells 
could therefore result in the release of fugitive emissions.  AEA (2012) state that leakage or failure rates for 
modern plug and abandonment procedures are not known although data reported for oil and shallow gas 
wells in 1993 in Western Canada indicate that 45% of the surveyed wells had gas migration.  A recent study 
                                                            
29 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Working Group 3 (2014) Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change.  
5th Assessment Report.  Available from https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
30 UK Energy Research Centre (2014) A Bridge to a Low-Carbon Future? Modelling the Long-Term Global Potential of Natural Gas.  
Available from https://www.bartlett.ucl.ac.uk/sustainable/documents-news-events/gas-as-a-bridge [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.10 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

of 19 abandoned wells in Pennsylvania by Kang (2014) 31, meanwhile, identified methane emissions from 
plugged wells which may be due to degradation of the plug and wellbore integrity, the lack of monitoring and 
maintenance, and/or poor well completions.  Although it is not clear whether the wells surveyed were 
recently abandoned (or if they were related to conventional and/or unconventional oil and gas exploration 
and production), the findings of the study would suggest a need for further research/monitoring, guidance 
and, potentially, regulation in this area.  In this respect, Kang notes that in the US, abandonment procedures 
for oil and gas wells have been motivated mainly by oil and gas resource conservation and protection and 
groundwater protection but not by the consideration of methane emissions.  Within the UK, Davies et al32 
noted that between 2000 and 2013, “no [pollution] incidents were reported at well sites in the UK that were 
inactive or abandoned”. 
During decommissioning, there would be emissions of GHGs associated with the use of machinery and plant 
as well as from construction traffic.  There would also be emissions associated with the embodied carbon in 
concrete used to plug wells and, potentially, the treatment of any waste arisings.   
Associated works may require the clearance of vegetation and loss of soil layers which could result in 
emissions of CO2 and methane together with loss of soil carbon sequestration.  However, it is not expected 
that the area of land required to undertake decommissioning activities (beyond existing well pads) would be 
significant.  In this respect, AEA (2012, p69) note that there is generally little difference between 
conventional and unconventional wells in the post-abandonment phase and that the consequences for land 
take would be “comparable with many other industrial and commercial land-uses, and are of no more than 
minor significance”.   

The total magnitude of GHG emissions associated with this stage would be dependent on site specific 
characteristics such as requirements for infrastructure such as roads, the distance to be travelled by vehicles 
during the transportation of materials and wastes and the carbon content of any soils displaced.  However, it 
is not expected that emissions would be of a magnitude considered to be nationally significant but instead be 
similar to those associated with the decommissioning of conventional oil and gas wells.   
Decommissioning could be affected by climate change where sites are located, for example, in coastal areas 
that may be affected by coastal inundation or sea level rise or in areas of flood risk that could be susceptible 
to extreme weather conditions.  Climate change effects such as intensified weather events therefore have 
the potential to affect activities during Stage 5 particularly given the fact that decommissioning would take 
place in the longer term (i.e. beyond the lifetime of a well) during which time the impacts of climate change 
(e.g. sea level rise) could become more pronounced.  This risk would be similar to that associated with the 
decommissioning of conventional oil and gas wells.   

Site restoration and relinquishment 
Like site restoration activities associated with conventional oil and gas wells, it is expected that in most cases 
all associated infrastructure and hardstanding would be removed during the site restoration and 
relinquishment stage.  Due to the need for invasive demolition techniques and land excavation, there would 
be GHG emissions associated with the use of plant and from construction traffic.  There may also be 
additional GHG emissions related to the treatment of wastes.   
Following the completion of site restoration activities, there would be no further GHG emissions or energy 
use, reducing effects on climate change in the longer term.  Depending on the end use of well pad sites 
(which would be determined on a site-by-site basis following discussions between the operator and the 
regulator(s)), there may be opportunities to enhance carbon sequestration through rehabilitation and re-
vegetation.  Site restoration may also provide an opportunity to enhance climate change resilience through 
measures such as green infrastructure provision that reduces surface water run-off or flood attenuation 
schemes.  However, the extent to which such measures could be implemented would be dependent on a 
                                                            
31 Kang, M. (2014) CO2, Methane, and Brine Leakage through Subsurface Pathways: Exploring Modelling, Measurement, and Policy 
Options.  A Dissertation Presented to the Faculty of Princeton University in Candidacy for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy.  
Recommended for Acceptance by the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering.  Note that the findings of the study are 
subject to peer review. 
32 Davies, R.J. Almond, S. Ward, R.S. Jackson, R.B. Adams, C. Worral, F. Herringshaw, L. Gluyas, J. Whitehead, M.A.(2014), Oil and 
gas wells and their integrity: Implications for shale and unconventional resource exploitation, Marine and Petroleum Geology.  Available 
from https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/Publishedversion.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
 

   

April 2015 

  B5.11 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

site’s location, characteristics and end use and in this respect AEA (2012) highlight that it may not be 
possible to return entire sites to beneficial use due to, for example, concerns regarding public safety.  The 
report states (at page 69) that over a wider area “this could result in a significant loss of land, and/or 
fragmentation of land area such as an amenity or recreational facility, valuable farmland, or valuable natural 
habitat”.   

5.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  The feasibility of measures to reduce GHG emissions through and related to the permitting 

process should be considered.  These measures may include, for example: 
  development of guidance suggesting measures to reduce GHG emissions during all stages 

of the unconventional oil and gas exploration of production lifecycle; 

  discussion with regulators on appropriate mandatory requirements to be applied at each 
stage to ensure that the best technology is implemented in all cases (as per MacKay and 
Stone, 2013); and 

  implementation of GHG emissions recording and monitoring protocols, reflecting 

recommendations contained in the AEA (2012) report concerning the climate impact of 
potential shale gas production in the EU and of MacKay and Stone (2013). 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
As for Stage 1, but also including:  

  Site selection should be informed by an assessment of flood risk to ensure that risks associated 

with climate change impacts are identified and addressed (e.g. through the implementation of 
sustainable drainage systems).  During the site selection process, careful consideration should 
be given by the operator to the avoidance of carbon sinks (e.g. peats); 

  Where possible, measures should be taken to offset (at least in part) GHG emissions arising 

from construction and operational activities.  These measures may include, for example: 
  the use of construction materials with low embodied carbon; 

  measures to reduce private vehicle use for workers; 
  the use of low emission vehicles or HGVs conforming to the highest available standards for 

vehicle emissions; 

  the use of low emissions equipment and alternative energy sources; 

  development of a transport plan to reduce HGV traffic (for example through load sharing); 

designate parking and storage areas; and identify appropriate transport routes and times e.g. 
avoiding peak traffic hours to minimise congestion and idling emissions; 

  sourcing local materials, personnel, equipment and waste disposal to help reduce vehicle 

movements to the site; 

  connecting to water supplies and wastewater infrastructure to reduce requirements to tanker 

water to and from site, reducing emissions from vehicles;   

  provision for the transportation of materials and construction wastes by rail where 

practicable; 

   

April 2015 

  B5.12 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  identifying opportunities for the on-site reuse, recycling and recovery of inert and non-

hazardous waste; and 

  where possible, retaining equipment on-site. 

  Reflecting the recommendations identified by MacKay and Stone (2013), operators should: 

  in managing vented or flared methane throughout the exploration, pre-production and 
production of shale gas, adopt the principle of reducing emissions to as low a level as 
reasonably practicable (ALARP); and   

  monitor their sites to: (1) ensure early warning of unexpected leakages; and (2) obtain 

emissions estimates for regulators and government.  This may include, for example, ambient 
air monitoring, hydrostatic pressure testing of pipework and equipment used to transport gas, 
regular seismic monitoring and monitoring of fracture propagation. 

  Reflecting the recommendations of Teasdale et al (2014), monitoring of emissions should be 
undertaken over a sufficient duration so as to capture seasonal variations in the ground gas 
regime. 

  Enclosed completion systems should be adopted to avoid venting from lagoons or tanks; 
  Liquid unloading from wells should be undertaken utilising low emissions technologies such as 

well swabbing, velocity tubing, artificial lift and plunger lifts; 

  Governments, regulators and industry should undertake research into shale gas production with 

a view to developing more effective extraction techniques, such as improved REC and self-
healing cements, reduced water consumption and vehicle demand which minimise wider 
environmental impacts including whole-life-cycle GHG emissions; and 

  Permits should require information relating to (inter-alia), the relationship between the zone of  

interest and any overlapping or adjacent aquifers, methods of well construction, well integrity 
testing, where the well stimulation fluid is expected to travel, details of the liquids to be injected, 
water use and disposal of effluents. 

Production Development 
As for Stage 2. 

Production/operation/maintenance  
As for Stage 2. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  Well design and methods of plugging should minimise long term fugitive emissions.  Monitoring 

should be undertaken to detect any release of emissions.   

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  Where appropriate, consideration should be given to the implementation of soil sequestration 

projects as part the restoration process; 

  Where appropriate, consideration should be given to how sites can be used to enhance climate 

change resilience during restoration (e.g. through flood attenuation schemes). 

   

April 2015 

  B5.13 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

5.4  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) sets an overall framework for 
international action to tackle the challenges posed by climate change.  The Convention sets an ultimate 
objective of stabilising greenhouse gas concentrations "at a level that would prevent dangerous 
anthropogenic (human induced) interference with the climate system.”  The Convention requires the 
development and regular update of greenhouse gas emissions inventories from industrialised countries, with 
developing countries also being encouraged to carry out inventories.  The countries who have ratified the 
Treaty, known as the Parties to the Convention, agree to take climate change into account in such matters 
as agriculture, industry, energy, natural resources and where activities involve coastal regions.  The Parties 
also agree to develop national programmes to slow climate change. 
The Kyoto Protocol, adopted in 1997, is the key international mechanism agreed to reduce emissions of 
greenhouse gases.  The Kyoto Protocol sets binding targets for 37 industrialised countries and the European 
Community for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  These targets equate to an average of 5% reductions 
relative to 1990 levels over the five-year period 2008-12.  The key distinction between this and the UNFCCC 
is that the Convention encourages nations to stabilise greenhouse gases while the Kyoto Protocol commits 
them to doing so through greenhouse gas reductions.  Countries must meet their targets primarily through 
national measures however, the Kyoto Protocol offers them an additional means of meeting their targets by 
way of three market-based mechanisms: emissions trading, the clean development mechanism (CDM) and 
Joint Implementation (JI). 
The Protocol’s first commitment period started in 2008 and ended in 2012.  At the Durban conference in 
December 2011, governments decided that the Kyoto Protocol would move into a second commitment 
period in 2013, in a seamless transition from the end of the second commitment period in 2012.  
Governments of Parties to the Kyoto Protocol also made amendments to the Protocol, among others, the 
range of greenhouse gases covered.  A major outcome was the establishment of the Durban Platform for 
Enhanced Action, which spelt out a path to negotiate a new legal and universal emission reduction 
agreement by 2015, to be adopted by 2020.  

In March 2007, the EU’s leaders endorsed an integrated approach to climate and energy policy that aims to 
combat climate change and increase the EU’s energy security while strengthening its competitiveness.  They 
committed Europe to transforming itself into a highly energy-efficient, low carbon economy.  It set a series of 
demanding climate and energy targets to be met by 2020, known as the "20-20-20" targets.  These are: 

  A reduction in EU greenhouse gas emissions of at least 20% below 1990 levels;  
  20% of EU energy consumption to come from renewable resources; and 

  A 20% reduction in primary energy use compared with projected levels, to be achieved by 

improving energy efficiency. 

To secure a reduction in EU greenhouse gases, the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS), a Europe 
wide scheme, was introduced in 2005.  EU ETS puts a price on carbon that businesses use and creates a 
market for carbon.  It allows countries that have emission units to spare (emissions permitted to them but not 
‘used’) to sell this excess capacity to countries which are likely to exceed their own targets.  Since CO2 is the 
principal greenhouse gas, this is often described as a carbon market or trading in carbon; the total amount of 
carbon emissions within the trading scheme being limited, and reduced over time.  The Integrated Climate 
and Energy Package included a revision and strengthening of the Emissions Trading System (ETS).  A 
single EU-wide cap on emission allowances will applied from 2013 and will be cut annually, reducing the 
number of allowances available to businesses to 21% below the 2005 level in 2020.  The free allocation of 
allowances will be progressively replaced by auctioning, and the sectors and gases covered by the system 
will be somewhat expanded. 
The Renewable Energy Directive (2009/28/EC) mandates levels of renewable energy use within the 
European Union.  The Directive requires EU member states to produce a pre-agreed proportion of energy 
consumption from renewable sources such that the EU as a whole shall obtain at least 20% of total energy 
consumption from renewables by 2020.  This is then apportioned across member states. Under Article 4 of 

   

April 2015 

  B5.14 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

the Directive, each member state is also required to complete a National Renewable Energy Action Plan that 
will set out the trajectory and measures that will enable the target to be met. 
The Mining Waste Directive (2006/21/EC) aims to prevent or reduce as far as possible the adverse effects 
on the environment and any resultant risks to human health from the management of waste from the 
extractive industries.  The Directive sets out how to achieve this aim by providing for measures, procedures 
and guidance on how extractive industries should be managed including a requirement that operators take 
adequate measures to prevent/ reduce gas emissions. 
The Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control Directive (2008/1/EC) (IPPC) requires industrial 
activities to have a permit (issued by the relevant competent authority of the member state) containing 
emission limit values and other conditions based on the application of Best Available Techniques (BAT) and 
set to minimise emissions of pollutants likely to be emitted in significant quantities to air, water or land.  
Permit conditions also have to address energy efficiency, waste minimisation, prevention of accidental 
emissions and site restoration. 
The Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) (2010/75/EU) combines seven existing air pollution directives, 
including the Large Combustion Plant Directive and the Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC) 
Directive.  As with previous directives aimed at minimising emission release, part of the benefit of the IED is 
that it includes several new industrial processes, sets new minimum emission limit values (ELVs) for large 
combustion plant and addresses some of the implementation issues of the IPPC. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Directive 2011/92/EU aims for the environmental impacts from 
certain projects to be identified and for mitigation measures to be proposed.  Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) are not mandated for all shale gas operations and would be necessary when operations 
exceed 500,000m3 gas extraction or are deemed likely to have significant environmental impacts, which 
could include impacts associated with emissions. 

UK 
In the UK, the Climate Change Act (2008) introduced legislative targets for reducing the UK’s impacts on 
climate change and the need to prepare for its now inevitable impacts.  The Act sets binding targets for a 
reduction in CO2 emissions of 80% by 2050, compared to a 1990 baseline.  Interim targets and five-year 
carbon budget periods will be used to ensure progress towards the 2050 target.  The Climate Change Act 
2008 also requires the Government, on a regular basis, to assess the risks to the UK from the impact of 
climate change and report to Parliament.  The first Climate Change Risk Assessment was published in 
2012.  Government will be required to publish and regularly update a programme setting out how the UK will 
address these likely impacts, based on the principles of sustainable development, thereby ensuring that 
environmental, economic and social issues are all fully considered.  The Climate Change Act 2008 also 
introduced powers for Government to require public bodies and statutory undertakers (in this context these 
are utilities companies which provide a public service) to carry out their own risk assessments and make 
plans to address those risks. 
Section 49 of the Infrastructure Act 2015 details how the likely impact of onshore oil and gas exploration on 
the UK carbon budget will be determined.  Specifically, advice will be sought from the Committee on Climate 
Change on the impact which combustion of, and fugitive emissions from onshore oil and gas exploration and 
production activities on the Government’s ability to meet the duties imposed by the net UK carbon account 
target for 2050. 
The Carbon Plan: Delivering our low carbon future (2011) sets out how the UK will achieve 
decarbonisation within the framework of energy policy: to make the transition to a low carbon economy while 
maintaining energy security, and minimising costs to consumers, particularly those in poorer households.  It 
includes proposals for energy efficiency, heating, transport and industry. 
The Energy Act (2011) provides for some of the key elements of the Government’s energy programme and 
including a step change in the provision of energy efficiency measures to homes and businesses.  It also 
makes improvements to the framework for enabling and securing low carbon energy supplies and fair 
competition in the energy markets. 

   

April 2015 

  B5.15 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Gas is expected to retain a key role in electricity generation, as well as remaining a dominant fuel for 
domestic heating and a major fuel source for industry.  The UK Government published its Gas Generation 
Strategy in December 2012 setting out the important role gas has to play to maintain adequate capacity 
margins, meet demand and provide supply-side flexibility.  The role of gas will be determined by the market, 
whilst keeping emissions within the limits set out in the Carbon Budgets.  The Government expects a 
continued need for new investment in gas plant (up to 26GW could be required by 2030), and the objective 
of the Strategy is to reduce the uncertainty around gas generation for investors. 
The Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 sets up a pollution control regime.  
The environmental regulator would specify conditions for environmental permits, for example limiting the type 
and quantity of emissions released to air.  Extractive gases such as those released from flowback fluid are 
considered mining waste, so the site would need to provide a Waste Management Plan as part of the permit 
application for a mining waste operation.  The Plan must set out objectives to prevent or reduce the 
production of extractive waste; encourage recovery; and ensure safe disposal.  The permit may need to 
include areas designated for the deposit of waste gases as part of the mining waste facility.  An industrial 
emissions permit would also be required for operations that flare more than 10 tons of gas per day.   
 

   

April 2015 

 

  B6.1 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

6.  Waste and Resource Use 

6.1 

Introduction 

Waste management in this context is defined as the processing, recycling or disposal of a range of waste 
types including municipal, commercial and industrial, construction, excavation and demolition and hazardous 
wastes.  However, it is important to note that consideration of the management of waste links to a number of 
other study topics, the most relevant being climate change given the potential for flared gases to be 
recovered for energy use. 

6.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects of waste generation arising unconventional oil and 
gas exploration and production activities.  Table B6.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, 
production and decommission. 

Table B6.1  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities 

Stage 

 

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 

  Seismic surveys; 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring; 

  Provision of pipeline connections; 
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

 
 

   

April 2015 

  B6.2 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B6.1 (continued) Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities 

Stage 

 

Activities 

4 

5 

6 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 
 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
This majority of activities in this Stage are desk-based such as site identification and securing permits. As a 
result, it is not expected that waste would be generated.  
Certain seismic survey techniques, such as vibroseis, require roads or hard surfaces for use.  In the majority 
of cases, it is assumed that a site would be accessed by existing roads, however, if an area is not accessible 
by existing roads it may require the construction of temporary access routes.  Given the temporary nature of 
the road and the minimal traffic expected, these access routes may consist of a layer of crushed 
stone/gravel/cobbles.  The volume of materials recycled would depend on the length of access routes 
required to complete the seismic surveys.   
In the UK, aggregates come from a variety of sources and are classified as ‘primary’ aggregate and 
‘secondary’ aggregate.  Primary aggregates are extracted material such as rock or gravel which has 
undergone physical processing e.g. crushing or sizing, also known as ‘natural’ aggregate.  Secondary 
aggregates include manufactured aggregate, which are minerals arising from industrial processes, and 
recycled aggregate, which includes processed materials previously used in construction.  There may be 
possibilities both to use recycled aggregate on the site and/or to recycle aggregates after use.  Recycling 
aggregates after use would help reduce waste generated from the site, and using recycled or secondary 
aggregate would help reduce demand for new resources.  Recycled aggregates can typically be used in road 
construction, ground improvements, earthworks, foundations and trenches.1, 2  Although these access roads 
may be used again should the site be used for production, the removal of the road would therefore not be 
expected to result in a waste stream as the materials could be recycled.   

                                                            
1 WRAP (2010) Construction Applications.  Available from http://aggregain.wrap.org.uk/opportunities/applications/ [Accessed November 
2014]. 
2 British Geological Survey & Department of Communities and Local Government (2013) Mineral Planning Factsheet: Construction 
Aggregates.  Available from https://www.bgs.ac.uk/mineralsuk/planning/mineralPlanningFactsheets.html [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.3 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

There are also alternatives to aggregates available such as high density polyethylene panels, which could be 
installed to create temporary access routes and protect the ground.  In the UK, panels may be hired from 
providers and then returned to the vendor after use to avoid waste generation.3,4 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
The preparation of the well pad would require the clearance of vegetation, the stripping of topsoils and the 
levelling of the site in order to lay a solid foundation, similar to other conventional oil and gas projects.  This 
is not expected to result in producing notable volumes of waste as usual practice in the UK would be for the 
soil to be stored around the perimeter of the site, creating screening bunds to be accessed following site 
decommissioning for the restoration of the site.  Any vegetation stripped from the surface could be chipped, 
shredded and composted where feasible but otherwise would require disposal to landfill.   

The well pad site typically comprises of an area between 1 and 2 hectares.5  The proposed Cuadrilla 
operations in Lancashire, UK, specify that this would include a 1.55 hectare well pad plus a further hectare of 
surrounding surface works.  The remainder of the Cuadrilla site comprises a further 5.5 hectares for surface 
water collection ditches, landscaped bunds, fencing and pipelines.6  There may be a single well or multiple 
wells on a well pad.  The well pad is likely to be constructed from compacted aggregate laid on an 
impermeable membrane and geotextile layer.  Surface water runoff would be collected and attenuated via 
perimeter ditches.  There should be no connectivity between the runoff ditches from the well pad and any 
other surface water features adjacent to the well pad.  Access to the well pad could be through the use of the 
access routes created during stage 1; however, if only temporary access routes used at the non-intrusive 
stage, the access roads would also need to be constructed, which may require crushed aggregate as above 
for non-intrusive exploration.   
Concrete and mixed construction waste is also expected to be generated from the construction of site 
compounds, well pad and associated infrastructure.  This waste would be typical of construction projects and 
not a significant contributor to the overall project waste.  It is estimated that 0.46 tonnes of mixed 
construction waste is produced per £100,000 spent on an energy utility project.6  
A surface seismic monitoring array would be installed to collect seismic data to provide a baseline and to 
monitor the induced seismic effects from fluid injection.  For the proposed Cuadrilla exploratory drilling site at 
Preston New Road, Lancashire, this includes eight surface arrays and 80 buried arrays.  Cuadrilla assumed 
that soil and stone from the installation of the arrays would be reused onsite.  Each buried array is also 
expected to generate 3m3 of bentonite slurry and 0.03m3 of cement waste requiring offsite disposal. 

Once the pad had been constructed, initial test boreholes would be drilled, with some being developed into 
full wells.  The process of drilling creates waste in the form of drill cuttings, spent drill muds and excess 
cement which is returned to the surface.  Boreholes down to approximately 100m are also required for the 
buried seismic arrays and for groundwater monitoring, which would create further drilling wastes requiring 
disposal.  In the UK, drilling wastes are covered under section 1, ‘wastes resulting from exploration, mining, 
quarrying, and physical and chemical treatment of minerals’ in schedule 1 of the List of Wastes (England) 
Regulations 2005, implemented following the adoption of the EU Waste Directive (67/548/EEC) and after the 
List of Wastes Decision (2000/532/EC).  Those wastes in the list relevant to drill cuttings and which are 
considered hazardous include: 

  Oil-containing drilling muds and wastes (waste: 01 05 05); and 
  Drilling muds and other drilling wastes containing dangerous substances (waste: 01 05 06). 

                                                            
3 Terrafirma (2014) Dura-Base.  Available from http://terrafirma.gb.com/en/ [Accessed November 2014]. 
4 Groundtrax (2014) Ground Protection & Ground Reinforcement.  Available from http://www.groundtrax.com/ [Accessed November 
2014]. 
5 AEA (2012) Support to the Identification of Potential Risks for the Environment and Human Health arising from Hydrocarbons 
Operations involving Hydraulic Fracturing in Europe.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
6 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement.  Available 
from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed April 
2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.4 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Drill cuttings are rock fragments created from the drill process, flushed to the surface by the drill mud. The 
average volume of drill cuttings per well for unconventional oil and gas is typically higher than for 
conventional operations as the length of wells is considerable longer due to the horizontal section.  A vertical 
well with a depth of 2,100m would produce an average of 120m3 of cuttings, while an unconventional well 
with an additional lateral 1,200m section would produce approximately 170m3 of cuttings.5   
Cuttings may be moved offsite and (within the UK) would be disposed of at an EA licensed landfill site; or 
could be disposed of onsite if appropriate; or reinjected into a geological formation.  Reinjection is usually the 
preferred option and is now a proven technology and geological risks (i.e. loss of containment in receiving 
formation) are low.7 
Drilling muds may be oil or water-based, with oil based muds reported to be more conventional and more 
commonly used in the US.8  However, shale gas best practice in the UK specifies that water based drilling 
muds should always be used when drilling through shallow soils or local aquifers.9  Drilling muds are re-
circulated, while spent muds are a waste product.  They typically contain a mix of the geological formations 
encountered (drill cuttings), liquid (water or oil), clay (bentonite) plus any additives used.  In general, their 
physical and chemical composition will vary according to each project’s drilling design and underlying 
geology.  

Water based drilling muds would contain rock fragments from the drill cuttings which may be suitable for use 
in recovery operations, after appropriate treatment.  Oil based muds are more likely to be classified as a 
hazardous waste and within the UK would require disposal at an appropriately EA licensed disposal site.  
Spacer fluid is used to remove drilling mud from the well and to prepare it for cement injection.  This is 
estimated at 30m3 spacer fluid per well for the Cuadrilla exploratory drilling at Preston New Road, 
Lancashire.  In order to ensure the integrity of the well and protect groundwater, steel casing is cemented 
into the wellbore in stages by pumping cement slurry between the wall of the well and the steel casing.  As a 
result of this process, a proportion of the cement returns to the surface and requires on site storage before 
being taken offsite for treatment/disposal at a suitable site, estimated at approximately 5% of the total 
concrete used for construction of the well chamber.  Proposed Cuadrilla operations estimate 20m3 of cement 
waste to be generated per well.6   
During the hydraulic fracturing process, 10,000 – 25,000m3 fracturing fluid is typically injected into the shale 
rock.5  Some of the liquid that is injected returns to the surface through the drilled well.  This fluid is known 
as ‘flowback water’ and is typically very saline and contains minerals dissolved from the rocks. The 
proportion of fracturing fluid that returns as flowback water varies between wells, with some US studies 
reporting flowback of between 10 – 40% of the fracturing fluid10 although other studies report flowback can 
be as high as 75%.11  The volume of flowback water returned depends on the properties of the rock 
formation (such as the geology of the host formation and mobility of naturally occurring compounds), 
fracturing design and the type of fracturing fluid used.12  

The composition of flowback water depends on the constituents of the fracturing fluid which had been 
injected into the well as well as the presence and concentrations of naturally occurring substances in the 
shale.  Cuadrilla has published the nature of the fracturing fluid approved for its UK operations: 

  Polyacrylamide friction reducers (0.075%), commonly used in cosmetics and facial creams, 

suspended in a hydrocarbon carrier; 

                                                            
7 Department of Energy and Climate Change (2010) Strategic Environmental Assessment for a 14th and Subsequent Onshore Oil & 
Gas Licensing Rounds, Environmental Report, Appendix 5: Consideration of Activities.   
8 Sharma, M.M., et al (2012) A New Family of Nanoparticle Based Drilling Fluids, Society of Petroleum Engineers, SPE Annual 
Technical Conference and Exhibition, 8-10 October, San Antonio, Texas, USA.  Available from 
http://www.spe.org/atce/2012/pages/schedule/technical_program/documents/spe160045-page1.pdf [Accessed April 2015].   
9 United Kingdom Onshore Operators Group (UKOOG) (2013) UK Onshore Shale Gas Well Guidelines: Exploration and appraisal 
phase.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/185935/UKOOGShaleGasWellGuidelines.pdf [Accessed 
April 2015]. 
10 Halliburton (2014) Produced and Flowback Water Recycling and Reuse Economics, Limitations, and Technology, Oil and Gas 
Facilities.  Available from http://www.spe.org/ogf/print/archives/2014/02/ [Accessed April l2015]. 
11 AEA (2012). 
12 King GE (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101, Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34 – 42, as cited in AEA (2012). 

   

April 2015 

  B6.5 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Hydrochloric acid (0.125%), frequently found in swimming pools and used in developing 

drinking water wells; and 

  Biocide (0.005%), used on rare occasions when the water provided from the local supplier used 

in the hydraulic fracturing needs to be further purified.  

To date, Cuadrilla operations have used 99.95% water and sand (proppant) with 0.05% polyacrylamide 
only.13  More broadly in the US, fracturing fluid may also include various surfactants, thickeners, and scale 
and corrosion inhibitors.  The nature and content of fracturing fluid in the US is not as transparent as in the 
UK and is not necessarily transferrable to UK activities, due to differing requirements over the publication of 
fracturing fluid composition and restrictions on the types of chemicals used.  However, these substances 
would return to surface as part of the constituents of flowback water (refer to Appendix B.3: Water for 
further detail on the composition of fracturing fluid).  The table below sets out typical contaminants in 
flowback water for shale gas wells in the US, and constituents could therefore vary in the UK or elsewhere 
depending on the geological composition of the shale and the components of the injected fracturing fluid.  
The minimum and maximum values come from records of 541 shale gas wells and seven well samples 
analysed by the study authors.  Sources for the 541 shale gas records reviewed by the authors included 
peer-reviewed journals, book chapters plus government and industry documents and analytical results.   

Table B6.2   Typical levels of contaminants in flowback water from shale gas extraction 

Parameter 

pH 

Alkalinity 

Nitrate 

Phosphate 

Sulphate 

Radium 226 (pCi/g) 

Hydrogen carbonate 

Aluminium 

Boron 

Barium  

Bromine 

Calcium 

Chloride 

Copper 

Fluoride 

Iron 

Potassium 

Lithium 

Magnesium 

Minimum (mg/L) 

Maximum (mg/L) 

1.21  

160  

Not detected (ND) 

ND 

ND 

0.65pCi/g 

ND 

ND 

0.12 

ND 

ND 

0.65 

48.9 

ND 

ND 

ND 

0.21 

ND 

1.08 

8.36 

188 

2,670 

5.3 

3,663 

1.031pCi/g 

4,000 

5,290 

24 

4,370 

10,600 

83,950 

212,700 

15 

33 

2,838 

5,490 

611 

25,340 

                                                            
13 Cuadrilla (2014) Fracturing Fluid.  Available from http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/what-we-do/hydraulic-fracturing/fracturing-fluid 
[Accessed October 2014].   

   

April 2015 

  B6.6 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B6.2 (continued)  Typical levels of contaminants in flowback water from shale gas extraction 

Parameter 

Manganese 

Sodium 

Strontium 

Minimum (mg/L) 

Maximum (mg/L) 

ND 

10.04 

0.03 

96.5 

204,302 

1,310 

20 

ND 

Zinc 
 
Source: Alley B., Beebe A., Rodgers J., Castle J.W. (2011) Chemical and physical characterization of produced waters from 
conventional and unconventional fossil fuel resources, Chemosphere, 85, (1), 74-82. 
 
Flowback water analysed by the Environment Agency from the Cuadrilla Preese Hall exploratory well in 
Lancashire, UK was found to contain high levels of sodium, chloride, bromide, iron, lead, magnesium, zinc 
and low levels of naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORMs) such as radium, picked up from the rock 
formations.14  The fluid contained up to 179µg/litre of lead (compared to drinking water standards of 
10µg/litre) and chromium was present at over four times the drinking water standard, at 222 µg/litre.15  
Flowback fluid typically also contains high salt levels.  Salinity levels determined from test drilling in the 
north-west of England identified various salt contents ranging from brackish to highly saline water 
(23,000ppm to 103,000ppm sodium chloride).16  
Naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) can be present in flowback water at levels above the 
regulatory thresholds for radioactivity.  In these circumstances, within the UK, the flowback water would be 
designated as radioactive waste and has to be disposed of or treated accordingly.  This would require both 
the well operator and any waste water treatment facilities receiving the waste to hold a radioactive 
substances permit.  Preliminary analysis by the Environment Agency showed the flowback fluid at the 
Preese Hall site in Lancashire contained radioactivity in the form of radium-226 between 14 – 90 Bq/litre, 
well above the 1 Bq/litre regulatory threshold for controlling NORM activities.  Potassium-40 and radium-228 
were also found to be present.  A study of the flux of radioactivity in flowback fluid from shale gas 
development in the Carboniferous, Bowland Shale, UK; the Silurian Shale, Poland; and the Carboniferous 
Barnett Shale, US by Almond et al (2014)17 found that levels of NORM in flowback water are much higher 
than found in groundwater, but well below permitted UK exposure limits.  Their radioactivity is also lower than 
that of fluids produced by conventional oil or gas production, or nuclear power.  

Some of the water that flows to the surface also includes produced water (water coming to the surface, 
under pressure, ‘produced’ from saturation of the host formation).  After the initial recovery of the hydraulic 
flowback fluid (in the flowback water), produced water will continue in many cases to come to the surface 
with decreasing quantities of hydraulic fracturing fluid.  Flowback water typically returns to the surface within 
the first few days or weeks following injection of fracturing fluid, while produced water is generated from the 
rocks across the lifetime of the well.  Due to the low permeability of shale, it contains a very low water 
content and does not permit any flow and so produced water is not anticipated to arise from unconventional 
wells in the UK.  Outside of the UK, treatment and/or disposal of produced water is a greater waste issue.  
Produced water is typically generated in much lower volumes than flowback fluid, estimated at an average of 
57m3 per year per well in the US.18  Pads with multiple wells would therefore have corresponding increases 
in produced water requiring treatment or disposal.  

                                                            
14 Environment Agency (2011) Shale Gas North West- Monitoring of Flowback Water.  Available from 
http://www.fraw.org.uk/files/extreme/envage_flowback_2011.pdf [Accessed October 2014].   
15 ENDS (2013) UK Shale Gas and the Environment: Managing Contamination Risks. 
16 Broderick J., et al (2011) Shale gas: an updated assessment of environmental and climate change impacts. A report commissioned by 
The Co-operative and undertaken by researchers at the Tyndall Centre, University of Manchester.  Available from 
http://www.tyndall.ac.uk/sites/default/files/coop_shale_gas_report_update_v3.10.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
17 Almond, S. Clancy, S.A. Davies, R.J. Worrall, F. (2014) The flux of radionuclides in flowback fluid from shale gas exploitation, in 
Environ Science and Pollution Research International 2014; 21(21): 12316–12324.  Available from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4200344/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
18 European Parliament (2011) Impacts of shale gas and shale oil extraction on the environment and on human health.  Available from 
http://europeecologie.eu/IMG/pdf/shale-gas-pe-464-425-final.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.7 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Waste produced water also typically contains substances found in the rock formations, such as dissolved 
solids, gases, trace metals, naturally occurring radioactive elements, and organic compounds.5  Small 
quantities of fracturing fluid may also be present depending how far through the well’s lifetime the produced 
water occurs. 
Flowback water requires storage prior to any treatment or disposal.  In the US, holding ponds are used to 
store flowback water to allow the settlement of its contents.  Settlement ponds have been the source of 
significant problems, including failure of the ponds resulting in surface water pollution and additional 
methane emissions.  Open storage and settlement is not permitted in the UK, with storage of flowback water 
in tanks on site as part of a closed system prior to treatment or disposal.19 
The disposal of flowback water simply by re-injecting it into the shale strata and storage of flowback water in 
open surface lagoons are widely adopted disposal methods in the US.  However, reinjection without water 
treatment or blending with freshwater can result in blocking the underground fractures by the substances in 
the flowback water.  Reinjection or open pit storage is not permissible in the UK under current groundwater 
protection legislation due to the risks of contamination.  Direct discharge to surface water would also not be 
permitted in the UK due to the high salt content and presence of contaminants.  The EA deems that although 
flowback fluid is a waste when it returns to the surface, if it can be treated to the point where it performs the 
same function as fresh injection fluid, it will no longer be a waste and could be used in well stimulation.  The 
three main options for safe disposal in the UK are: 

  On-site treatment with re-use of water and disposal of remaining liquids and solids to a suitable 

licensed waste treatment and disposal facility; 

  Removal off site to a suitable licensed waste treatment and disposal facility; and 
  Disposal to a special sewer with the permission of the relevant waste water utility company.19   

The EA considers the reuse of flowback fluid following treatment and blending with fresh water to be the 
preferred and sustainable option for its management in the UK.20  The EA considers the reuse of flowback 
fluid should be present in any waste management plan for the operational stage.  The re-use of flowback 
water is however less likely during exploratory drilling and therefore it is assumed that it will require treatment 
and disposal at this stage.  
If being disposed of at wastewater treatment works (WwTW), the high salinity and suspended materials such 
as heavy metals means that the fluid can cause damage to some elements of the WwTW, if not adequately 
equipped for treatment of this type of waste fluid.  Lower volumes of waste flowback water would be 
generated during the exploratory phase, and it would therefore be a more significant issue during the longer 
term operational stages.6.  To avoid damaging the plant, a high level of dilution would typically be required 
during the water treatment process, particularly in areas where there are numerous wells generating waste 
water.  A certain minimum flow volume to reach the necessary dilution of salt and other substances would 
generally only be available at larger WwTW, such as those near large population centres.  If hydraulic 
fracturing takes place in a relatively rural location, plant of this scale may be a considerable distance from 
the fracturing site thus substantially increasing the transport distances if the waste flowback fluid is tankered 
to a WwTW in another part of the country.   
Alternatively, some level of pre-treatment may be necessary if the local WwTW is not of sufficient size to 
provide appropriate dilution of pollutants.5  Pre-treatment options include desalination to reduce salt content, 
which may be by evaporation, distillation, selective membranes, electric separation or chemical treatment, 
but these are often energy intensive and costly techniques.  The brine slurry produced by the desalination 
process can be crystallised to allow disposal as solid waste.  Chemical precipitation to remove suspended 
solids and substances such as magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium and radium is necessary prior to final 
discharge to surface waters or reuse, as is disinfection via filtration, ultraviolet (UV) light, chlorine, iodine, 
ozone or acid treatments.  

During treatment of flowback water in WwTWs, NORM may accumulate in the sewage sludge rather than 
liquid effluent.  Additional pre-treatment may therefore be required for NORM removal prior to the entry of 

                                                            
19 DECC (2014) Fracking UK Shale: Water.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277211/Water.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
20 Environment Agency (2013) Onshore oil and gas exploratory operations: technical guidance, Consultation Draft. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.8 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

flowback water into the WwTW to avoid this, for example through acid-alkali treatment to precipitate the 
NORM out of solution for separate disposal.15  This solid may be disposed of to landfill if NORM 
concentrations are sufficiently low.  In the UK, radioactive flowback fluid remains classified as radioactive 
waste until final discharge from offsite effluent treatment works or until reuse as a fracturing fluid.  If the 
flowback water is not above the threshold to be classed as radioactive waste, then NORM pre-treatment 
would not be required and the waste water could be processed as normal in a WwTW.   
According to the EA, flowback water at Preese Hall was stored on site in double skinned tanks. It was then 
transported to the Davyhulme wastewater treatment work (WwTW).  This WwTW treats other industrial 
effluents from the Manchester area and was considered by the Agency as capable of dealing with the levels 
of minerals contained in the flowback water from the Preese Hall site.  
Removal of wastewater by road tanker or infrastructure to transport wastewater to nearby treatment facilities 
could require substantial infrastructure investment, as could construction of water treatment works on site.   

There are alternatives to the use of water as a fracturing fluid, such as gels, carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas 
foams.  The use of some of these alternative fluids, particularly propane-based liquid petroleum gas (LPG) 
and foam, could reduce the toxicity of wastewater as salts, heavy metals and NORM are not so easily picked 
up from the shale formations.  Foam and LPG are commercially in use in some shale formations in the US 
and Canada.  While this can decrease local water demand, alternatives may not be appropriate for all types 
of shale formation and there are potentially further cost and production considerations.21  They would also 
present alternative waste streams which may have further waste disposal issues.  
Poor management of waste flowback water and other chemicals used on site can lead to accidental spillage 
and contamination of soils, surface or groundwater if not appropriately contained.  This may lead to 
contaminated materials being removed from site as waste.  A 2011 MIT study of gas well drilling in the US 
found that a third of documented incidents between 2005 and 2009 related to accidental spills and leaks, and 
nearly 10% of incidents related to off-site disposal issues.22 
Scale that accumulates inside pipes, treatment or storage tanks can include solidified NORM, so radioactive 
scale may be another waste stream which requires appropriate disposal off site.  Scale principally consists of 
barium, calcium and strontium compounds, in addition to radioactive materials such as radium.  These 
substances precipitate out of solution due to changes in temperature and pressure in the well.23  However 
scale is not expected to be a significant waste stream, with relatively small amounts generated on a non-
routine basis.6  

Any natural gas that may arise from drilling and flowback fluid may be disposed of by flaring in the earlier 
exploration stages.  Although this is an extractive waste, it is not considered to be a hazardous waste and 
would be likely to be considered a gaseous effluent, with highly flammable properties.  The drill-out process 
which occurs after hydraulic fracturing can release further waste methane emissions.  Leakages of methane 
and other gases may also occur from pumps, valves, compressors and other equipment which would be 
waste gases released to air.6  
In the UK, flaring is regulated by DECC as part of a licence condition and it is DECC’s established policy that 
flaring should be reduced to the economic minimum.24  As an alternative to flaring, ‘green completion’ 
involves the capture of methane from the fracturing process for use or export off site.  Although not occurring 
at all sites, a recent study in the US found that for sites that capture gas emissions from flowback water, 99% 
of the potential emissions were captured during the green completion process.25  Green completions can 
                                                            
21 European Commission Joint Research Centre (2013) An overview of hydraulic fracturing and other formation stimulation technologies 
for shale gas production.  Available from 
https://ec.europa.eu/jrc/sites/default/files/an_overview_of_hydraulic_fracturing_and_other_stimulation_technologies_%282%29.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015].   
22  MIT (2011) The Future of Natural Gas: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study, as cited in RSBP (2014) Hydraulic Fracturing for Shale Gas in 
the UK.  Available from http://www.rspb.org.uk/Images/shale_gas_report_evidence_tcm9-365779.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
23 Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing.  Available from 
https://royalsociety.org/policy/projects/shale-gas-extraction/report/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
24 DECC (2013) About Shale Gas and Hydraulic Fracturing (Fracking).  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/268017/About_shale_gas_and_hydraulic_fracturing_Dec
_2013.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
25 Allen, D.T., et al (2013) Measurements of methane emissions at natural gas production sites in the United States, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 110 (44), 17768-17773.  Available from 
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1304880110 [Accessed November 2014].  

   

April 2015 

  B6.9 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

therefore significantly reduce the amount of waste methane generated from flowback fluid, however 
appropriate infrastructure for transport offsite may not be in place until later production stages.  For the UK, 
MacKay and Stone (2013) recommended that green completions should be adopted at all stages following 
exploration and that emissions of waste methane should be reduced to as low a level as reasonably 
practicable (ALARP).26  The UK Government supports this recommendation and specifies that DECC’s 
licence conditions mean that in practice operators must use green completion techniques to achieve the 
licence requirements, as well as setting a requirement to use green completions as the ‘best available 
technology’ for production facilities.27  Venting natural gas is not permitted in the UK except for safety 
reasons, as part of DECC’s licence conditions.28  

In 2011, it was estimated that 1.6% of the total natural gas extracted from a study of four wells in the US was 
released as a waste gas from flowback fluid, with 50% of methane emissions typically captured and flared 
across the US, with the rest vented to atmosphere.18  A more recent study by Allen et al (2013) of 150 sites 
in the US found that flowback emissions have been reduced substantially through improved gas collection 
during flowback.  Allen also identified that releases of methane from plant and equipment leaks were now the 
greatest contributors to methane emissions during well production.  Overall, waste methane emissions 
during the hydraulic fracturing process were found to represent an average of 0.42% of gross gas 
production.25  The climate change impacts of the methane releases are considered elsewhere in Appendix 
B.5: Climate Change. 
Other waste that is likely to be generated on site includes: waste oils; paraffins; waxes; oil contaminated 
rags; used batteries; waste chemicals, scrap metals and used containers.  Spill kit materials contaminated 
with oil and diesel from equipment spills and leaks may also arise as a waste stream.  If occurring within the 
UK, many of these waste streams would be designated as hazardous waste requiring appropriate disposal at 
an EA licensed site. 
Sanitary wastewater would also be generated from site facilities.  Drilling sites may not be connected to the 
sewerage system so this waste may require alternate disposal means. 
A summary of the waste streams expected to be generated by Cuadrilla for exploratory drilling and fracturing 
is set out in the below table.  Note that the proposed waste recovery and disposal methods are based on the 
local waste infrastructure available to the project in the north-west of England, and may not be representative 
of waste facilities or the most suitable disposal route available elsewhere. 

Table B6.3   Summary of waste streams for exploratory drilling and fracturing 

Waste Stream 

Category 

Polymer based water drilling muds 

Non-hazardous 

Drill cuttings used with polymer based 
water muds 

Non-hazardous 

Low-toxicitiy oil based emulsion drilling 
muds 

Non-waste 

 

Cuadrilla Planned 
Recovery/Treatment/Disposal Method 

Recycled offsite where feasible.  A small 
amount may be lost to formation.  Residual 
waste to specialist disposal facility. 

Treatment at a specialist facility.  Residual 
waste to specialist disposal facility. 

Closed loop system, muds are 
reconditioned by the supplier for reuse.  A 
small amount may be lost to formation. 

                                                            
26 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/237330/MacKay_Stone_shale_study_report_09092013.p
df [Accessed April 2015]. 
27 DECC (2014) The Government’s Response to the MacKay-Stone Report: Potential greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale 
Gas Extraction and Use.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/305811/140424_MacKay_Stone_Response_.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
28 DECC (2014) Fracking and Local Air Quality.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277219/Air.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.10 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B6.3 (continued)  Summary of waste streams for exploratory drilling and fracturing 

Waste Stream 

Category 

Drill cuttings used with low-toxicity oil 
based emulsion muds 

Hazardous  
 

Losses to formation 

Non-hazardous / Hazardous 

Cement waste from the well casing 

Non-hazardous 

Spacer fluid 

Non-hazardous 

Any contaminated materials from 
remediating oil or diesel spills, oil from 
separators, various waste oils and 
lubricants 

Hazardous 

General waste e.g. paper, timber, scrap-
metal, food waste 

Non-hazardous 

Wastewater (foul effluent) 

Non-hazardous 

Cuadrilla Planned 
Recovery/Treatment/Disposal Method 

Treatment as hazardous waste.  Residual 
waste to hazardous waste disposal facility. 

Cuadrilla unlikely to be able to recover 
losses to formation. 

Recycled where feasible.  Residual waste to 
landfill. 

Treatment offsite and disposal at a 
specialist site for liquids. 

Treatment as hazardous waste.  Recovery 
where feasible.  Residual waste to 
hazardous waste disposal facility. 

Recycling where feasible onsite.  Materials 
Recovery Facility.  Residual waste to 
landfill. 

Recovery at a local Wastewater Treatment 
Works. 

Industrial wastewater (rainwater captured 
by the pad during drilling) 

Non-hazardous 

Recovery for treatment at a local 
Wastewater Treatment Works. 

Flowback fluid 

Sand 

Solid scale 

Radioactive – Non-hazardous 

Reuse on site 

Non-hazardous 

Recycled into secondary aggregates 

Radioactive Waste – Low Level Waste 

Augean Low Level Waste facility  

Materials and equipment contaminated by 
NORM 

Radioactive Waste – Low Level Waste 

Augean Low Level Waste facility 

Surplus natural gas 
 
Source: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement. 
 

Hazardous (highly flammable) 

Flared onsite 

Overall, activities during this stage are expected to generate volumes of waste, primarily from drill cuttings, 
spent drilling mud and flowback water, including some hazardous waste. 

Production Development 
The range and type of effects associated with Stage 3 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and 
production lifecycle would be similar to those identified under Stage 2.  However, the area of land take 
required per well pad would be greater than that associated with the exploratory drilling stage, reflecting the 
need for additional infrastructure such as storage tanks and on-site pipelines.  Additional wells would also be 
drilled.  Additional activities could include the completion of road connections and the installation of pipelines 
required to collect natural gas for transfer to the existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure.   
The extension of the pad is not expected to result in additional waste as the soil would be collected and 
stored in banks around the site perimeter.  Once the well is decommissioned, the soil would be used to 
restore the site.  
Drilling operations at this stage would generate similar waste streams to those expected at Stage 2 but the 
scale of activity would increase substantially through the use of multiple well pads.  This would result in 
additional volumes of waste than expected under Stage 2, depending on the number of wells developed. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.11 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The reuse of exploratory wells for production would result in less drill waste being generated (than requiring 
all new wells to be completed), as it would not be necessary to drill the well from the surface again. 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Once in production, the volumes of waste being generated typically are higher for unconventional wells than 
for conventional wells.  

The reuse of fracturing fluid may be a more economically viable option during production, compared to the 
exploration stage.  Recycling the wastewater through onsite treatment of fracturing fluid prior to reuse would 
reduce the volume of waste water generated. 
With regard to unconventional wells, there is a strong likelihood they would be refractured to stimulate the 
flow of shale gas again.  In the US, the frequency of refracturing is not certain and is estimated to be once 
per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  AEA reports that it is uncertain whether the US approach is 
transferable to Europe, with an expected potential for wells to be refractured once every 10 years and a 
potential maximum well lifetime of 10 to 40 years for European operations.5  Given the lack of data for well 
lifetimes and the large numbers of wells in the US that have been shut down within 10 years, the life span of 
wells is not certain at this time and estimates of up to 40 years may be optimistic.29  For each refracturing 
that occurs, it would result in similar levels of flowback water being generated as estimated in Stage 3.    
The build-up of potentially radioactive scale would occur in greater quantities during production than 
exploratory drilling, but would still remain a minor waste stream from the site. 

If the site is not connected to the sewerage system, sanitary waste would also require collection, for example 
in a sealed cell tank for disposal to an approved location.  This would vary by the number of employees on 
site and the duration of operations. 
Rainwater may collect in site drainage ditches and sumps.  If the collected water contains anything other 
than clean rainwater, in the UK this must be collected and disposed of as waste.  The surface runoff water 
may be contaminated with oils and classed as hazardous waste.30 

Decommissioning of wells 
There is a general requirement on operators to remove as much equipment and structures from the pad site 
as possible, with the exception of infrastructure required to ensure the well is safely plugged.  
It is expected that a proportion of the well infrastructure could recycled (although to some extent that will 
depend on the viability of future onshore operations) as well as functioning, efficiency and operational safety 
of the well infrastructure to be reused.  Large waste streams are not expected therefore at this stage.  
Although some waste would be generated, and would need to be managed, these are expected to be 
negligible in scale.  

Site restoration and relinquishment 
As with conventional oil and gas well pads, site restoration would involve the removal of all remaining 
surface structures and the excavation and transport of the concrete and hard core pad based used for the 
pad site, or other materials which were laid or used to prepare the pad site.  It is assumed that these 
materials, once broken up and graded could be reused as construction aggregate. 
Any clean aggregates and concrete would be expected to be reused or recycled off site within the UK.  
Materials from the pad surface such as liners may be recovered, disposed to landfill or treated as hazardous 
waste where contaminated by spills or leaks.6  

                                                            
29 Hughes, J.D. (2014) Drilling Deeper: A Reality Check on U.S. Government Forecasts for a Lasting Tight Oil & Shale Gas, Post 
Carbon Institute.   
30 Cuadrilla Resources Ltd (2010) Becconsall Hydrocarbon Exploration Site, Planning Application July 2010, Section 2 – Supporting 
Statement to the Application. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.12 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Historically, wells in the US were often poorly plugged with various unsuitable materials from the site, leading 
to potentially dangerous releases of gas or fluids from the well.  Cement plugging is now most common for 
sealing wells.31  
Soil that has been stored on site should be reused to restore the site to the previous land use (or to support 
the land use determined by the local planning authority).  It is assumed that the soil would be free of any 
contamination that may have occurred during the exploration and/or production phase. 
It is assumed that the site would be reseeded with an appropriate mix, compatible with existing land use 
(whether amenity greenspace, grazing or arable land).  As appropriate, landscaping should also take place. 

6.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle.6, 30, 32 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Materials used for the construction of access roads should be chosen dependant on their ability to be 
recycled into a product for which there is a viable market. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Planning resource management should be used to ensure that the minimum amount of waste is 
generated, for example by avoiding over-ordering supplies; correct storage of materials to avoid 
damage and wastage; use of suppliers that minimise packaging; and specification of materials, 
such as recycled aggregates for the well pad and access road construction or the use of 
reusable panels for temporary routes, where possible. 

  Site Waste Management Plans should be put into place to ensure that all wastes produced 

during construction and pad preparation are handled according to regulatory requirements and 
best practice.  Waste management planning should establish a clear strategy for wastes that 
will be generated including options for waste elimination, reduction, recycling, treatment and 
disposal.  Waste should be considered at the design stage of the project to design out waste 
where possible. 

  On-site waste management to separate waste streams such as timber, scrap metal and 

cardboard promotes reuse and recycling and helps reduce volumes of waste sent to landfill.  
Hazardous waste must be stored and disposed of separately to non-hazardous waste.  
Hazardous waste liquids should also be stored in secondary containment. 

  All soils should be handled in suitable conditions (e.g. dry weather) and the most appropriate 

method of soil handling should be used.  Soils should be stored in allocated heaps and 
protected from erosion, contamination or degradation.  Different soil types should be stored 
separately e.g. topsoil, sub-surface material, and the length of time soils are stored should be 
minimised where possible. 

  Treat drilling muds to clean the mud for reuse in order to reduce the total volume required.  Mud 

cleaning can include the use of cyclones and shaker tables to remove sand, silt and solids.33  
Muds should be disposed of once they can no longer be cleaned and reused.  Mud disposal 
routes can include further separation into waste water for treatment, oil for energy recovery and 

                                                            
31 Technology Subgroup of the Operations & Environment Task Group (2011) Paper #2-25: Plugging and Abandonment of Oil and Gas 
Wells.  Availavle from https://www.npc.org/Prudent_Development-Topic_Papers/2-25_Well_Plugging_and_Abandonment_Paper.pdf 
[Accessed April 2015]. 
32 Environment Agency (2013) Onshore Oil and Gas Exploratory Operations: Technical Guidance (Consultation Draft). 
33 Weatherford (2011) Drilling Fluids and Waste Management Services.  Available from http://www.weatherford.com/dn/wft166679 
[Accessed November 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.13 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

solid waste for processing and disposal, if appropriate treatment plants are accessible.34  Return 
any unused drilling muds to the vendor. 

  Use non-hazardous drilling muds where feasible to reduce the environmental risks associated 

with oil based muds and to improve recycling opportunities for drilling muds and cuttings.  Water 
based drilling muds should always be used when drilling through shallow soils or local aquifers.  
  Ensure that cement slurry injection is managed by an experienced and competent contractor to 

help minimise the proportion of cement returning to the surface as waste. 

  Minimise the volume of water used per fracturing stage to the minimum needed for the nature 
and geology of the shale formation, in order to reduce the volume of flowback fluid generated.  
For example, Cuadrilla’s exploratory drilling in Preston New Road, Lancashire UK, proposes to 
use 765m3 water during fracturing rather than the more typical 1,000m3 to reduce flowback 
fluid.6  

  Store flowback fluids within double skinned tanks and bunded storage facilities on site, rather 

than open holding ponds. 

  If feasible at exploration stage, treat flowback fluid so that it can be reused in the hydraulic 

fracturing process, for example through separation to remove sand, oil and gas, plus ultraviolet 
(UV) disinfection.  UV disinfection would reduce the quantity of chemical biocides required.   

  Sand separated through the treatment of flowback fluid can be removed from site and recycled 

into aggregates. 

  Undertake analysis to assess the existence and extent of NORM during the exploratory phase 

in order to determine the likely requirement for wastewater treatment. 

  Ensure that flowback fluid containing NORM is treated using an approach that ensures 

environmental protection, and is not disposed of at wastewater treatment works that are unable 
to process radioactive waste.  Options could include pre-treatment with acid-alkali to precipitate 
out NORM for disposal or treatment at a wastewater treatment site licensed to accept 
radioactive waste. 

  Consider the use of reverse osmosis or evaporation and crystallisation to reduce levels of Total 
Dissolved Solids (TDS) in wastewater, as wastewater treatment plants may not be designed to 
remove these substances.  Elevated TDS levels may affect the functioning of the wastewater 
plant and potentially contaminate any receiving waters after discharge. 

  Seek to avoid treatment offsite of flowback and produced water to reduce transport (if not 

connected to an appropriate waste water treatment plant by pipelines); however, before 
progressing consider additional energy consumption implications of any proposed onsite 
treatment.  Should vehicle transport off site be required, promote sustainable transport options 
to transport and treat water generated during this stage. 

  Use green completion techniques to capture natural gas for use on or offsite.  If this is not 
possible, install an engine to burn the gas and recover energy.  If flaring is the only option 
available, ensure that the natural gas is burned at temperatures above 800oC to ensure 
complete combustion. 

  To avoid the risk of spills entering the wider environment and potentially causing contamination 
of soil and other materials which may have to be disposed of as hazardous waste, seal the site 
with an impermeable membrane underneath well pads and use bunds to contain liquid 
substances. 

  Rainwater collected on the surface of the pad should be regularly tested to determine whether it 

is uncontaminated and can be discharged from site or used within the hydraulic fracturing 

                                                            
34 Enviroco (2014) Drilling Mud Treatment Plant.  Available from http://www.enviroco.co.uk/capabilities/services/oil-gas/mtp/ [Accessed 
November 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.14 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

process, or whether it requires collection and removal from site as hazardous waste e.g. if 
contaminated with oil/chemicals. 

Production Development 
In addition to the mitigation measures listed for exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing: 

  Site Waste Management Plans should be extended to cover the management of waste during 
stage 3 operations.  Waste management planning should establish a clear strategy for wastes 
that will be generated including options for waste elimination, reduction, recycling, treatment 
and disposal. 

  Good practice guidance in the protection of soil materials should be followed. 
  Promote best practice in selected methods to transport and treat wastewater generated during 

this stage. 

Production/operation/maintenance  
In addition to the mitigation measures listed for exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing: 

  Connect the well to the gas main as soon as possible to enable collection and use of waste 

methane produced, or store the gas and export off site.  Alternatively, an engine could be 
installed to burn waste methane and recover energy for use in any future onsite activities (such 
as the refracking that maybe required). 

  Ensure that there is sufficient storage capacity on site for waste flowback fluid if there is a risk of 
the production of fluid exceeding the treatment capacity of local facilities.  Operations may need 
to be suspended in the event that no treatment or storage capacity is available. 

  Promote best practice in selected methods to transport and treat wastewater generated during 

this stage. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  A Waste Management Plan should be adopted prior to decommissioning to ensure that all plant 

and infrastructure that is required to be decommissioned is recycled. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  The decommissioning Waste Management Plan should be extended and adopted prior to site 
restoration to ensure that all plant and infrastructure that is required to be decommissioned is 
recycled.   

  Stockpiled soils should be reused for land reclamation as soon as practicable. 
  Previously excavated materials from the project construction stage should be reused on site 

where feasible. 

6.4  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The Waste Framework Directive 75/442/EEC as amended by 91/156/EEC, 91/92/EEC and 2008/98/EC 
provides the overarching framework for waste management at the EU level.  It relates to waste disposal and 
the protection of the environment from harmful effects caused by the collection, transport, treatment, storage 
and tipping of waste.  In particular, it aims to encourage the recovery and use of waste in order to conserve 
natural resources.  The key principles of the Directive include the ‘Waste Management Hierarchy’ which 
stipulates waste management options based on their desirability.  In order, these are: prevention; preparing 

   

April 2015 

  B6.15 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

for re-use; recycling; other recovery, e.g. energy recovery; and disposal.  Key objectives are to reduce the 
adverse impacts of the generation of waste and the overall impacts of resource use.  This should be done 
through a variety of mechanisms, including: 

  By 2020, requiring member states to recycle 50% of their household waste and 70% of their 

non-hazardous construction and demolition waste;  

  Applying the waste hierarchy - promoting waste minimisation followed by reuse and recycling, 
other recovery (such as energy recovery) and disposal - as a priority order in waste prevention 
and management legislation and policy; 

  Ensuring that four specified materials (paper, metal, plastics and glass) are collected separately 

by 2015;  

  Taking measures as appropriate to promote the re-use of products and preparing for re-use 

activities; and 

  Extending the self-sufficiency and proximity principles to apply to installations for recovery of 

mixed municipal waste from households.  

The Directive was transposed into English legislation through the Waste (England and Wales) Regulations 
2011 (SI2011 No.988). 
A compromise agreement was reached between the Council of Environment Ministers and the European 
Parliament in June 2008 on revisions to the Waste Framework Directive.  The main changes include EU-
wide targets for reuse and recycling 50% of household waste by 2020, and for reuse, recycling and recovery 
of 70% of construction and demolition waste by 2020.  In this context, the Landfill Directive 99/31/EC 
(European Commission, 1999) focuses on waste minimisation and increasing levels of recycling and 
recovery.  The overall aim of the Directive is to prevent or reduce as far as possible negative effects on the 
environment, in particular the pollution of surface water, groundwater, soil and air and on the global 
environment, including the greenhouse effect as well as any resulting risk to human health from the 
landfilling of waste, during the whole lifecycle of the landfill.  The Directive sets the target of reducing 
biodegradable municipal waste landfilled to 35% of that produced in 1995 by 2020. The Mining Waste 
Directive 2006/21/EC aims to prevent or reduce as far as possible the adverse effects on the environment 
and any resultant risks to human health from the management of waste from the extractive industries.  The 
Directive sets out how to achieve this aim by providing for measures, procedures and guidance on how 
extractive industries should be managed. 
The Environmental Impact Assessment Directive 2011/92/EU aims for the environmental impacts from 
certain projects to be identified and for mitigation measures to be proposed.  Environmental Impact 
Assessments (EIAs) are not mandated for all shale gas operations and would be necessary when operations 
exceed 500,000m3 gas extraction or are deemed likely to have significant environmental impacts, which 
could include impacts from the generation and disposal of waste, among others. 
The Water Framework Directive 2000/60/EC aims to protect and enhance water quality.  It includes 
measures that relate to waste flowback water, such as not permitting the reinjection of flowback water 
containing hazardous substances for disposal in rock formations.  The Urban Waste Water Directive 
97/271/EEC concerns the discharge of industrial wastewater such as flowback fluid into urban wastewater 
treatment plants, requiring pre-treatment to avoid adverse effects on the treatment plant and the 
environment. 
The Basel Convention came into force in 1992 and is a global agreement, ratified by several member 
countries and the European Union, for addressing the problems and challenges posed by hazardous waste.  
The key objectives of the Basel Convention are: 

  To minimise the generation of hazardous wastes in terms of quantity and hazardousness;  

  To dispose of them as close to the source of generation as possible; and 
  To reduce the movement of hazardous wastes. 

   

April 2015 

  B6.16 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The EU Thematic Strategy on the Prevention and Recycling of Waste (2002-2012) is a long-term 
strategy aims to help Europe become a recycling society that seeks to avoid waste and uses waste as a 
resource.   
There are a number of Producer Responsibility Directives relating specifically to consumer products. Their 
purpose is to require businesses to reuse, recover and recycle waste which comes from products they 
produce, and each Directive sets national targets for recovery and recycling of these wastes. 
The World Summit on Sustainable Development (2002) in Johannesburg proposed broad-scale principles 
which should underlie sustainable development and growth including an objective on greater resource 
efficiency.   
The European Sustainable Development Strategy (2006) includes sustainable consumption & production 
and conservation & management of natural resources as key challenge areas. 

UK 
The Environmental Permitting (England and Wales) Regulations 2010 sets up a pollution control regime, 
and means that anyone who treats, deposits, recovers, or disposes of controlled waste must do so in 
accordance with the conditions of an environmental permit or an exemption.  Permits are also required for 
operations that generate certain wastes.  This includes the management of mining waste such as flowback 
fluid and waste gases, and any areas designated for the deposit of mining wastes.  The waste operator 
would need to provide a Waste Management Plan as part of the permit application.  The Plan must set out 
objectives to prevent or reduce the production of extractive waste; encourage recovery of waste; and ensure 
safe disposal.  An industrial emissions permit would be required for operations that flare more than 10 
tonnes of gas per day.  Additionally, a permit for the temporary storage and disposal of radioactive waste 
such as flowback fluid containing NORM may be necessary.  
The Waste (England and Wales) Regulations 2011 implement the revised EU Waste Framework Directive 
2008/98, which sets requirements for the collection, transport, recovery and disposal of waste.  They require 
organisations to confirm that they have applied the waste management hierarchy when transferring waste; 
amend the system for waste carrier and broker registration (introduced in the Control of Pollution Act 
1974); and exclude some categories of waste from waste controls.  The Waste (England and Wales) 
(Amendment) Regulations 2012 relate to the co-mingled collection of waste and require the separate 
collections of waste paper, metal, plastic and glass in England from 1st January 2015 (or confirmation that 
the waste contractor can adequately separate co-mingled waste streams).   
Under the Environmental Protection (Duty of Care) Regulations, persons concerned with controlled 
waste are under a duty of care to:  

  Prevent any other person committing the offence of depositing, disposing or recovering 

controlled waste without an environmental permit or in a manner likely to cause harm to health 
or the environment; 

  Prevent waste escaping through appropriate and secure storage and transportation;   
  Ensure that waste is transferred to an authorised person or to a person authorised to transport 

waste; and  

  Ensure the waste is accompanied by a written description (a waste transfer note).  The note 
must include a description of the waste and details of the parties involved in the transfer.  It 
must also include the relevant six figure List of Waste codes. 

The List of Waste (England) Regulations 2005 provide a system of classification for all wastes and 
determines whether they are hazardous.  Each waste has a six-digit identification code as set out in the 
Regulations.   
Hazardous waste is defined as waste possessing one or more of the hazardous properties set out in the 
Hazardous Waste Directive, e.g. explosive, toxic, oxidising, flammable, or irritant.  Under the Hazardous 
Waste (England & Wales) Regulations 2005, producers of hazardous waste are required to notify their 
premises to the environmental regulators.  All hazardous waste movements must be accompanied by 

   

April 2015 

  B6.17 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Hazardous Waste Consignment Notes containing written information about the waste and its movements.  It 
also requires hazardous and non-hazardous wastes (and different types of hazardous waste) not to be 
mixed.  This transposes the requirements of the EU Hazardous Waste Directive 91/689/EEC into national 
law. 
The Landfill Tax Regulations 1996 aim to discourage landfilling and promote those waste management 
options which are further up the waste management hierarchy, such as waste reduction and recycling.  The 
Environmental Permitting Regulations also include restrictions on waste accepted by landfill and includes 
a requirement for waste pre-treatment prior to landfill through physical, thermal, chemical or biological 
processes (including sorting) in order to reduce its volume or hazardous nature, facilitate its handling or 
enhance recovery.  Liquid wastes are also banned from landfill.   
UK Government’s Sustainable Development Strategy: Securing the Future (2005) and the UK’s Shared 
Framework for Sustainable Development, One Future - Different Paths (2005) includes sustainable 
Consumption and Production as one of four priorities and considers the five guiding principles: 

  Living within Environmental Limits; 
  Ensuring a Strong, Healthy and Just Society; 
  Achieving a Sustainable Economy; 

  Using Sound Science Responsibly; and 
  Promoting Good Governance. 

In February 2011, the Coalition Government published its vision for sustainable development and a package 
of measures to deliver it through the Green Economy, action to tackle climate change, protecting and 
enhancing the natural environment, fairness and wellbeing and building a Big Society. Mainstreaming 
Sustainable Development (2011) is a refreshed vision and builds on commitments and principles that 
underpinned the UK’s 2005 Sustainable Development strategy by recognising the needs of the economy, 
society and the natural environment, alongside the use of good governance and sound science.  
The Waste Management Plan for England (2013) provides a planning framework to meet the waste 
management needs of local areas, in order to support the objectives and provisions of the revised Waste 
Framework Directive (2008/98/EC).  It sets out the high level arrangements for waste and the approach for 
assessing the need for new waste infrastructure.  
The Waste Prevention Programme for England (2013) was launched in December 2013 as a requirement 
of the revised Waste Framework Directive.  It sets out the Government’s view of the key roles and actions 
which should be taken to move towards a more resource efficient economy.  As well as describing the 
actions the Government is taking to support this move, it also highlights actions businesses, the wider public 
sector, the civil society and consumers can take to benefit from preventing waste. 
 
 

   

April 2015 

 

  B7.1 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

7  Cultural Heritage 

7.1 

Introduction 

Cultural heritage, including architectural and archaeological heritage, within this context is defined as below-
ground and upstanding evidence of past human activity and encompasses artefacts, buried and underwater 
archaeological sites, earthworks, buildings, battlefields, historic gardens, historic landscapes, wrecks, 
hedgerows and ancient woodland.  Cultural heritage assets may also include land, buildings and structures 
that have, for example, an important cultural meaning/use, artistic significance or scientific value.  There are 
links between the cultural heritage topic and other topics in the study, specifically landscape and land use 
(as part of soils and geology). 

7.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on cultural heritage arising from the potential 
activities associated with the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production.  
Table B7.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and decommissioning. 

Table B7.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 
  Seismic surveys; and 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 

  Well design and construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; and 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 

  Facility construction and installation; 
  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 

  Well testing, possibly including flaring; 
  Provision of pipeline connections; and 
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

Stage 

1 

2 

3 

 

   

April 2015 

  B7.2 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B7.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

4 

5 

6 

Activities 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; and 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; and 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection; and 
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 
 

In the United Kingdom, there is no statutory requirement to employ any specific methodology for the 
assessment of impacts on heritage assets, and consequently reference is made to guidance documents 
from various sources1. However, a broad approach which seeks to capture likely effects and address them is 
as follows2: 

  Identify the baseline heritage assets and their setting;  
  Assess the significance/value of the baseline assets and their settings;  
  Identify and define the magnitude of impact and the severity of the effects;  

  Identify mitigation required and it methodology in terms of spatial extent, timeframe for 

implementation and techniques to be implemented; and  

  Assess the development impact and its effect on the significance of the asset taking into 

consideration any mitigation proposed (residual effects).  

In determining the nature and extent of likely impacts, the following criteria3 can be used to grade the 
significance of assets as set out in Table B7.2.  

                                                      

1 Institute for Archaeologists (2014) Standards and guidance for archaeological desk-based assessments.  Available from 
http://www.archaeologists.net/codes/ifa [Accessed October 2014]; Department for Transport (2014) Design manual for roads and 
bridges Vol.11, section 3, part 2.  Available from http://www.dft.gov.uk/ha/standards/ghost/dmrb/vol11/section3.htm [Accessed October 
2014]; English Heritage (2012) The setting of heritage assets.  Available from http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/publications/setting-
heritage-assets/setting-heritage-assets.pdf [Accessed October 2014]. 
2 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2013) Lancashire Shale Gas Exploration: Grange Hill, Singleton, Lancashire Environmental Impact 
Assessment Scoping Report.  Available from http://planningregister.lancashire.gov.uk/Attachments/6358/2013-07-
09_GH_Scoping_Issue.pdf [Accessed October 2014]. 
3 Derived from: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental 
Statement p.95.  Available from  http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-
content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed October 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B7.3 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B7.2   Cultural Heritage significance and typical descriptors 

Asset significance 

Very high 

High 

Medium 

Low 

Negligible 
 
 

Typical descriptors 

Assets of acknowledged international importance such as World 
Heritage Sites 
Assets that contribute to acknowledged international research 
objectives 

Nationally important assets  
Assets with potential to contribute to national research objectives 

Regionally important assets  
Assets with potential to contribute to regional research objectives 

Assets compromised by poor preservation and/or poor survival of 
contextual associations 
Assets of limited value, but with potential to contribute to local 
research objectives 

Assets with no or very little surviving heritage interest  

Effects can be either direct or indirect in character4.  Direct effects will result from activities associated with 
construction of the well-pad, access track and seismic arrays involving removal of topsoil and excavations. 
Indirect effects could arise from changes to local patterns of drainage potentially affecting buried deposits 
distant from the site. Effects can be temporary or permanent in nature, be adverse or beneficial.  Adverse 
effects will detract from the value of the cultural heritage asset itself, or its patterns or components.  
Beneficial effects could arise through increased understanding of the asset, improved setting and public 
access.     
Likely effects can be determined according to a combination of the significance of the asset and the 
magnitude of change, as set out in Table B7.35. 

Description of change 

Complete destruction/demolition of a site or feature. Change to 
the site or feature resulting in a fundamental change in our ability 
to understand and appreciate the heritage resource and its 
historical context and setting. 

Change to the site or feature resulting in an appreciable change in 
our ability to understand and appreciate the heritage resource and 
its historical context and setting. 

Change to the site or feature resulting in a small change in our 
ability to understand and appreciate the heritage resource and its 
historical context and setting. 

Negligible or no material change to the site or feature, or change 
in our ability to understand and appreciate the heritage resource 
and its historical context and setting. 

No change 

Table B7.3   Cultural Heritage magnitude of change 

Magnitude of change 

Major 

Moderate  

Minor 

Negligible  

No change 
 
 

                                                      

4 See Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.104. 
5 Derived from Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.95.  

   

April 2015 

  B7.4 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

In turn, the likely significance of effects can be gauged according to the five point scale set out in Table 7.46 
where neural and slight adverse effects are not judged to be significant.  

Table B7.4   Cultural Heritage significance of effects   

Significance of effect 

Very large adverse 

Large adverse 

Moderate adverse 

Slight adverse 

Neutral 

 

Effect 

Partial or total loss of a site identified as being of very high 
importance. 

Result in total, or almost total, loss of heritage assets. 
Be highly intrusive and would serious damage the setting of the 
heritage resource such that its context is seriously compromised 
and can no longer be appreciated or understood.  
Be strongly at variance with the form, scale and pattern of a 
heritage resource.  
Be in serious conflict with national policies for the protection of the 
heritage resource. 

Be out of scale or at odds with the form, scale, pattern and 
character of a heritage resource. 
Be intrusive in the setting (context) and adversely affect the 
appreciation and understanding of the resource. 
Result in a loss of features such that the integrity of the heritage 
resource is compromised, but not destroyed. 
Be in conflict with local or regional policies for the protection of 
heritage assets. 

Have a detrimental impact on the context of a heritage feature 
such that its integrity is compromised and appreciation and 
understanding of it is diminished.  
Not fit comfortably with the form, scale, pattern and character of a 
heritage resource. 
Be in conflict with local policies for the protection or enhancement 
of the heritage asset. 

Maintain existing historic features. 
Have no appreciable impacts, either beneficial or adverse on any 
known or potential heritage assets. 
Result in a balance of beneficial and adverse impacts. 
Not result in severance or loss of integrity, context or 
understanding within a historic landscape. 
Not be in conflict with policies for the protection or enhancement 
of the heritage asset. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
It is assumed that the activities associated with this stage (site identification, selection and characterisation 
and the securing of regulator approval) would be largely desk-based. Consequently, no significant effects on 
cultural heritage would be anticipated from these activities.   

However, there potentially could be disturbance effects associated with seismic testing, such as on fragile 
above or below ground buildings and artefacts. However, the potential impact of these activities on cultural 
heritage assets remains untested and therefore has uncertain impacts in the short or longer term. 
Vibroseis is a common method of seismic survey and typically involves 3-5 large truck mounted vibrator units 
which sub-sonically vibrate the ground while a number of support vehicles record the returning shock waves 
for analysis.  Surveys tend to be spatially restricted due to the requirement for roads or other hard surfaces 
accessible by vehicle.  Where roads have to be constructed to facilitate access to sites, any adverse effects 
would be temporary with land restored following completion of the surveys.  Where shot-hole techniques are 
utilised (which involve the use of explosions as a source of seismic energy), the requirement for large 

                                                      

6 Derived from Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.96.   

   

April 2015 

  B7.5 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

vehicular access would be likely to be reduced whilst it would be expected that shot holes would be infilled 
after use. 
Installation of arrays typically involves excavation of a pit to a depth of 0.80m and consequently the effects 
on unrecorded archaeological assets would be limited to the area of the pit, with the resulting magnitude of 
effects negligible7.  

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
There would be the potential for the loss or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes associated 
with preparation for drilling, although site investigation should have largely anticipated these effects.  The 
introduction of new elements into existing views could also have a negative effect on the setting of above-
ground historic or archaeological features or landscapes8.   
There would be the potential for well pad construction and drilling activities to result in the loss or damage to 
subsurface or buried archaeology.  The effects principally arise from topsoil clearance and excavations 
which could expose or remove features or artefacts of potential interest.  The effects are likely to be greatest 
where the excavations are deepest (for example in the drilling cellar or drainage ditches) and least where 
only minor excavation is required such as for access roads9.  
The potential for effects would depend upon the proximity of any investigations or works to cultural heritage 
or archaeological sites, features or landscapes, and their current condition and sensitivity.  

It is important to note that the potential effects on cultural heritage assets described above would be similar 
to those associated with the construction of conventional oil and gas well pads as well as other development 
projects. 

Production Development 
There would be the potential for the loss or damage to cultural heritage features and landscapes associated 
with preparation for drilling (such as through site expansion), although site investigation should have 
anticipated these effects.  The introduction of new elements into existing views could also have a negative 
effect on the setting of above-ground historic or archaeological features or landscapes10.  

There would be the potential for well pad construction and drilling activities, such as the disposal of drill 
cuttings11, to result in the loss or damage to subsurface or buried archaeology.  
The potential for effects would depend upon the proximity of any investigations or works to cultural heritage 
or archaeological sites, features or landscapes, and their current condition and sensitivity. 

Production/operation/maintenance 
Subject to appropriate mitigation identified as part of Stages 1-3, no effects on above-ground cultural 
heritage or archaeological sites or features are anticipated as a result of operational activities as no further 
surface disturbance will occur. Nevertheless, risks have been cited12 relating to potential negative effects on 
unrecorded cultural heritage artefacts (archaeological deposits and areas of high paleoenvironmental 
potential) as well as building foundations and fabric as a result of water abstraction and consequent 
depletion of groundwater, particularly in periods of water stress. However, local abstraction is considered 
unlikely due to regulatory requirements related to abstraction within the UK where it is likely that the majority 
of water supply will be via the mains.   

                                                      

7 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.103.  
8 See AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe: AEAT, report for the European Commission, 2012.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed May 2013]. 
9 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.93 & p.104. 
10 See: AEA (2012) p.xi. 
11 See: AEA (2012) p.37/38. 
12 English Heritage (2013) Hydro-fracturing Issues Report (Unpublished Draft). 

   

April 2015 

  B7.6 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Over time, the growth of visual screening could help to reduce visibility into the site and hence potential 
impacts on cultural heritage assets and their settings as well as historic landscapes.  

Decommissioning of wells 
No effects on cultural heritage features or landscapes are anticipated as a result of decommissioning, 
including subsurface and buried archaeological remains as these will have been identified in previous 
stages. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 
No effects on cultural heritage features or landscapes are anticipated as a result of decommissioning, 
including subsurface and buried archaeological remains as these will have been identified in previous 
stages.  
As part of site restoration, there could be opportunities to enhance the setting of heritage features and 
landscapes through landscape design. 

7.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  Regular monitoring of the effects of seismic survey activity on cultural heritage assets should be 

undertaken; 

  Sites selected should be of no cultural heritage value, and the presence of any sensitive assets 

in the vicinity identified through desk-based assessment and surveys as required; 

  Planning for operational site design and layout, in liaison with local and national experts, should 

take account of potentially vulnerable cultural heritage assets and their settings, including 
historic landscapes, which could be affected by construction and operational activities; 

  Forward planting to screen the site could be required to reduce potential visual impacts on 

cultural heritage assets; and 

  Identification of appropriate access routes would help to minimise potential negative effects on 

historic or archaeological features such as listed buildings, caused by transport pollution and 
vibration associated with lorry movements13. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Prior to any works on site, a desk study and site walkover should be undertaken to determine 
the historic and archaeological value of the sites and potential need for further site evaluation 
through trial trenching or more specific geophysical surveys. 

  Consultation with established bodies charged with cultural heritage protection should be 

undertaken during the planning and permitting process to help identify existing and potential 
assets in the vicinity of proposed activity (including drill pad sites, pipelines, roads and 
transportation routes)14. 

                                                      

13 IOD (2012) Getting Shale Gas Working.  Available from http://www.iod.com/influencing/policy-papers/infrastructure/infrastructure-for-
business-getting-shale-gas-working  [Accessed November 2014]. 
14  Eshleman K & Elmore A (2013) Recommended Best Management Practices for Marcellus Shale Gas Development in Maryland.  
Available from 

   

April 2015 

  B7.7 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Close monitoring during topsoil stripping and excavation works should be undertaken to identify 

unexpected features or artefacts.  This can involve mapping and recording of features which 
could require further investigation15. 

  Where potential impacts are identified the construction should be altered to minimise impacts, 

and if retention is not possible, consideration should be given to moving features or undertaking 
detailed excavation and recording. 

Production Development 

  Prior to any works on site, a desk study and site walkover should be undertaken to determine 
the historic and archaeological value of the sites and potential need for further site evaluation 
through trial trenching or more specific geophysical surveys; 

  Close monitoring during topsoil stripping and excavation works should be undertaken to identify 

unexpected features or artefacts; and 

  Where potential impacts are identified the construction should be altered to minimise impacts, 

and if retention is not possible, consideration should be given to moving features or undertaking 
detailed excavation and recording. 

Production/operation/maintenance  

  The effects of production activities should be closely monitored for adverse and cumulative 

impacts if there are likely to concentrations of activity in a locality. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  Prior to decommissioning, opportunities for landscape enhancement should be investigated, 

particularly if operations are in the vicinity of historic landscapes. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  Prior to decommissioning, opportunities for landscape enhancement should be investigated, 

particularly if operations are in the vicinity of historic landscapes. 

7.4  Regulatory Framework  

International/European 
The World Heritage Convention aims to promote co-operation amongst nations to protect heritage that is of 
such outstanding value that its conservation is important for current and future generations; and established 
a register of World Heritage Sites.  It is intended that properties on the World Heritage List will be conserved 
for all time.  Member states commit themselves to ensure the identification, protection, conservation, and 
presentation of World Heritage properties.  
The World Heritage Committee’s Operational Guidelines for the Implementation of the World Heritage 
Convention (2008) set out: the procedure from the inscription of properties on the World Heritage List and 
the List of World Heritage in Danger; the protection and conservation of World Heritage properties; the 
granting of International Assistance under the World Heritage Fund; and the mobilisation of national and 
international support in favour of the Convention. 

                                                                                                                                                                                

http://www.mde.state.md.us/programs/Land/mining/marcellus/Documents/Eshleman_Elmore_Final_BMP_Report_22113_Red.pdf 
[Accessed October 2014]. 
15 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.105.  

   

April 2015 

  B7.8 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the Archaeological Heritage of Europe (revised) is a Europe-
wide international treaty which establishes the basic common principles to be applied in national 
archaeological heritage policies.  It supplements the general provisions of the UNESCO World Heritage 
Convention (1972) and aims to protect archaeological heritage as a source of the European collective 
memory and as an instrument for historical and scientific study.  It sets out a framework which requires the 
member states to: 

  Maintain an inventory of archaeological heritage and designated protected monuments and 

areas; 

  Create archaeological reserves; and 

  For finders of any element of archaeological heritage to report and make it available to the 

competent authority.  

The European Convention on the Protection of the Archaeological Heritage (1992) made a number of 
important agreements including setting the definition of archaeological heritage as: “all remains and objects 
and any other traces of mankind from past epochs….shall include structures, constructions, groups of 
buildings, developed sites, moveable objects, monuments of other kinds as well as their context, whether 
situated on land or under water”’. 
The European Union Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive (2001/42/EC) at Annex I provides 
guidance related to the information that should be reported in the strategic environmental assessment. 
Impacts that should be covered are stated in Annex I (f): “the likely significant effects (1) on the environment, 
including on issues such as biodiversity, population, human health, fauna, flora, soil, water, air, climatic 
factors, material assets, cultural heritage including architectural and archaeological heritage, landscape and 
the interrelationship between the above factors.” 
Article 3 of the Environmental Impact Assessment Directive (2011/92/EU) sets out what should be assessed 
in an EIA. It states: “The environmental impact assessment shall identify, describe and assess in an 
appropriate manner ... the direct and indirect effects of a project on the following factors: 

(a) Human beings, fauna and flora; 
(b) Soil, water, air, climate and the landscape; 

(c) Material assets and the cultural heritage; and 
(d) The interaction between the factors referred to in points (a), (b) and (c).” 

UK 

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport White Paper Heritage Protection for the 21st Century (2007) 
sets out a strategy for protecting the historic environment, based on three core principles: developing a 
unified approach to the historic environment; maximising opportunities for inclusion and involvement; and 
supporting sustainable communities by putting the historic environment at the heart of an effective planning 
system. 
The National Planning Policy Framework (2012) sets out the principles for planning in the United Kingdom 
which include the stipulation that planning should: conserve heritage assets in a manner appropriate to their 
significance. The objective of the policies is to maintain and manage change to heritage assets in a way that 
sustains and, where appropriate, enhances its significance, which may be archaeological, architectural, 
artistic or historic. This significance may derive not only from its physical presence but also from its 
setting. When determining applications for development, planning authorities are required to have regard to: 

  The desirability of sustaining and enhancing the significance of all heritage assets (whether 

designated or not) and putting them to viable uses consistent with their conservation;  
  The positive contribution that conservation of heritage assets can make to sustainable 

communities, including their economic vitality; and  

   

April 2015 

  B7.9 
                      
 

Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  The desirability of new development making a positive contribution to local character and 

distinctiveness. 

The draft Heritage Protection Bill contains provisions to unify the designation and consent regimes for 
terrestrial heritage assets, and transfer responsibility for designation of these assets.  It also contains 
provisions to reform the marine heritage protection regime in England and Wales by broadening the range of 
marine historic assets that can be protected.  The draft Bill is based on the proposals set out in the White 
Paper, Heritage Protection for the 21st Century (2007), and is one element of a wider programme of on-going 
heritage protection reforms.  There are however, no current plans to enact the Bill and it is not known 
whether its provisions will become statute. 
The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act (1979) provides for the scheduling of ancient 
monuments and offers the only legal protection specifically for archaeological sites.  The Planning (Listed 
Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act (1990) outlines the level of protection received by listed buildings, 
scheduled monuments and buildings within Conservation Areas. 

There are a number of other Acts which afford protection to cultural and historical assets, including the 
Protection of Wrecks Act (1973), which provides protection for shipwrecks of historical, archaeological or 
artistic value; the Protection of Military Remains Act (1986), which provides protection for the wreckage of 
military aircraft and designated military vessels, and the Treasure Act (1996), which sets out procedures for 
dealing with finds of treasure, its ownership and rewards, in England, Wales and Northern Ireland. 
 
 

   

April 2015 

 

  B8.1 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

8  Landscape 

8.1 

Introduction 

Landscape in this context is defined by The European Landscape Convention as ‘an area, as perceived by 
people, whose character is the result of the action and interaction of natural and/or human factors’.  This 
definition is stated as covering natural, rural, urban and peri-urban (i.e. the urban-rural fringe) and includes 
land, inland water and marine areas.  For the purposes of this study, landscape is taken to apply to rural 
areas, and townscape to urban areas.  Visual effects are those effects that influence how people perceive a 
landscape or townscape, such as the erection of a building or structure. 

8.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises a review of the likely effects on landscape arising from the potential activities 
associated with the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production.  Table B8.1 
presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and decommissioning. 

Table B8.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

1 

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 

  Seismic surveys; and 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; and 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development, including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring; 

  Provision of pipeline connections ; and 
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

2 

3 

 

   

April 2015 

  B8.2 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.1(continued)   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

4 

5 

6 

Activities 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; and 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; and 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection; and 
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 
 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Stage 1 of the unconventional oil and gas exploration and production lifecycle comprises non-intrusive 
activities. Site identification, selection and characterisation and the securing of regulator approval would be 
largely desk-based and in consequence, no effects on landscapes are anticipated from this activity.  

Vibroseis is a commonly used method of seismic survey and involves the employment of large vibrator unit 
vehicles as well as support vehicles for data recording. Construction of temporary tracks/roads may be 
required to facilitate site access and which could result in the fragmentation of local landscapes, particularly 
where new roads are of a significant length.  However, new tracks/roads would be temporary and land would 
be restored following completion of surveys.  In some cases, it may be necessary to use the shot-hole survey 
method. This involves the drilling of a hole with a small diameter for the insertion of explosives.  The shot-
holes are infilled, once the explosives have been detonated.  
Overall, the effects on landscapes and visual amenity would be localised and of a temporary nature, 
occurring only during seismic surveys, and as such are of a minimal impact.  

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 
The activity associated with this stage would mainly take place on site with some associated activity such as 
the construction of road connections located off-site.  Like conventional oil and gas activities, as well as other 
types of development, activity associated with pad preparation, road access and well construction would 
have short and medium-term impacts on visual amenity and landscapes.  
Further visual impacts will result from the presence of well heads and drilling rigs, with drilling operations 
lasting from  3 – 5 months per well, comprising up to 3 months for the vertical well and up to two months for 
the horizontal well1). The drilling rig would be in the range of 30-50m high2 and could result in locally 
                                                            
1 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration, Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement p.26 
at: http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed October 
2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.3 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

significant effects depending on the character and sensitivity of the receiving landscape and the extent to 
which such landscape changes are visible to communities.  However, due to the relatively short duration of 
the phase, these effects would be temporary3.  
The visual impact of a well during drilling and fracturing operations is illustrated in Figures B8.1 and B8.24, 
although these can vary by country. Environmental regulations in the United Kingdom, for example, preclude 
the use of holding ponds for water meaning that tanks are used instead. Figure B8.3 illustrates an 
exploratory drilling operation in Lancashire, UK and the use of water tanks, contrasting with the example 
from the United States in Figure B8.2. 

Figure B8.1  A shale gas site in Pennsylvania during drilling5   

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                     
2 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p.39. 
3 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe: AEAT, report for the European Commission p.xi.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
4 See also Marcellus Shale (undated) Marcellus Air Over Ohio's Utica Shale.  Available from http://www.marcellus-
shale.us/MARCELLUS-AIR_OHIO.htm [Accessed April 2015]. 
5 Ricardo-AEA (2013) Unconventional Gas in England: Description of infrastructure and future scenarios p.30.  Available from  
http://www.ricardo-aea.com/cms/assets/Uploads/Misc-uploads/ED58661-scenarios030214v14.pdf [Accessed October 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.4 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.2  A US shale gas site during a single hydraulic fracturing operation6   

 
 
Figure B8.3 

Hydraulic fracturing at Preese Hall, Lancashire UK7 

 

                                                            
6 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011) Supplemental Generic Environmental Impact Statement On The 
Oil, Gas and Solution Mining Regulatory Program; Well Permit Issuance for Horizontal Drilling And High-Volume Hydraulic Fracturing to 
Develop the Marcellus Shale and Other Low-Permeability Gas Reservoirs, Revised Draft, September 2011.  Available from 
http://www.dec.ny.gov/energy/75370.html [Accessed October 2014]. 
7 Energy-pedia (2011) UK: Cuadrilla Resources releases report on unusual seismic activity related to Lancashire shale gas drilling.  
Available from http://www.energy-pedia.com/news/united-kingdom/cuadrilla-resources-releases-report-on-unusual-seismic-activity-
related-to-lancashire-shale-gas-drilling [Accessed April 2015]. 

 

   

April 2015 

  B8.5 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

The average area covered by a pad for unconventional oil and gas exploration is between 1 and 2 hectares 
with site clearing (vegetation, soil layers) likely to be required at this stage. Additional clearing may be 
required for the provision of service roads.  
Flaring associated with testing may result in visual impacts. The effect will be dependent on location, height, 
duration and timing of the flare.  However, within the UK licence requirements ensure that flaring is kept to 
the economic minimum. Furthermore, within the UK, any effects will be minimised through the use of best 
available technology (BAT), required as part of the permitting process, which will include stack design which 
would minimise visual intrusion effects. It is assumed that night light pollution resulting from other 
construction activities would be mitigated through appropriate measures such as restricted working hours 
and shielding of emergency lighting to minimise disturbance. 
Public access to open spaces and the countryside is unlikely to be affected from the activity due to the small 
area (1 – 2 ha) of the site and the fact that activities would take place on the site.  

Chemical storage tanks and plants associated with hydraulic fracturing would result in additional elements on 
site.  Furthermore water storage tanks may be required, particularly in remote areas with limited or no 
connection to water mains. These elements would contribute to the visual intrusion associated with this 
stage.  
The exploration phase would lead to adverse effects on the landscape and visual impacts. Effects would be 
less significant where development takes place in an industrial setting. 

Production Development 
The production development stage would include similar activities to those under stage 2. This would include 
pad preparation; however, the average area covered by the well pad would be increased to 2-3 hectares. 
The expansion of land-take associated with this phase would increase potential visual impacts, particularly 
where this would involve clearing of high standing vegetation such as trees and shrubs.  The use of heavy 
plant, stockpiles, fencing, site buildings etc could potentially result in adverse visual intrusion during site 
preparation, particularly in sensitive areas of high landscape value, or in close proximity to residential areas. 
However, these operations are likely to proceed sequentially as a shale gas play is developed which would 
reduce the potential for cumulative effects which could result from simultaneous development of a number of 
pads in a given area, but would equally tend to make the impacts a longer-term feature in the landscape8.  
Chemical storage tanks and plants associated with hydraulic fracturing would result in additional elements on 
site. Furthermore, as more wells are drilled, additional water storage tanks may be required, particularly in 
remote areas with limited or no mains water connection.  These elements would contribute to the visual 
intrusion associated with this stage.  
Like conventional oil and gas production, additional construction activity would be required for facility 
provision and installation of pipeline connections.  The effects on the landscape resulting from the 
construction of pipelines could be significant but would be short term and are likely to be reversed once 
habitat restoration has been completed.  Furthermore, the significance of effects would depend on the width 
of the development corridor (which in itself is dependent on the pipeline diameter), length and location. 
Effects are likely to be more significant if the pipeline is routed through protected landscapes.  Figure B8.4 
illustrates the visual impact of pipeline laying operations. 
 

 

 

                                                            
8 AEA (2012) p.34. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.6 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.4  Pipeline construction in the NE United States9   

 

The presence of the pipeline would have short-term adverse effects and potential medium term impacts 
given the removal of a significant swathe of vegetation. Depending on the sensitivity of the landscape, 
significant effects could occur, although these would be dependent on routing, corridor length and width and 
the speed of restoration and re-vegetation. 
The potential cumulative visual effects of well development are potentially significant, where a network of 
wells and associated pipelines and roadways could affect a wide area.  Figure B8.5 shows a centralised 
compressor station located on the Marcellus Shale at Washington County, Pennsylvania together with well 
pads located within a four mile radius.  An indicative, 16 mile pipe network layout for the field is also shown, 
based on the assumption that the pipe network follows the access roads to the well pads, and then follow 
existing roads and/or forest clearings.  

                                                            
9 Ricardo-AEA (2013) p.22.   

   

April 2015 

  B8.7 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.5  A local network of shale gas wells in the NE United States10   

Over a wider area, the cumulative impact could (depending on topography and vegetation cover) be 
significant with a well density of one per 1.6km2, as in the example shown in Figure B8.6. 

 

                                                            
10 Ricardo-AEA (2013) p.21.   

   

April 2015 

  B8.8 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.6  A local network of shale gas wells in the NE United States (57 wells covering 90sqkm)11   

 

In conclusion, production development could lead to negative effects on landscapes due to the development 
size of pads and the development of the associated infrastructure.  These effects could potentially be 
significant depending on the distribution and density of pads, the phasing of their development, the character 
and sensitivity of the receiving landscape and the extent to which such landscape changes are visible to 
communities12. 

Production/operation/maintenance 
There would be no additional effects resulting from this stage under the assumption that production, 
operation and maintenance would take place on the existing site. This stage does not involve the 
introduction of additional infrastructure which could have implications on the landscape. However, there may 
be some short term effects associated with wells that are re-fractured.  It is likely that residual effects on the 
landscape would remain in the long-term and may result in a permanent change of landscape and visual 
amenity for local communities.  The degree of perceived intrusion is likely to be lessened through the 
maturing of landscaping and re-vegetation.  In some cases it may be possible to minimise effects through 
mitigation measures, such as screening through existing features or planting and landscaping.  Effects 
resulting from the construction of the pipeline have been assessed as neutral in the medium and long term 
as habitats recover and corridor vegetation matures.  

Figures B8.7 and B8.8 illustrate pad production facilities and the effect of the removal of the infrastructure 
which was required during the drilling and fracturing phase.  
                                                            
11 Ricardo-AEA (2013) p.38. 
12 European Commission Joint Research Centre (2012) Shale Gas for Europe – main environmental and social considerations: a 
literature review.  Available from http://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/bitstream/111111111/26691/1/lbna25498enn.pdf 
[Accessed October 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.9 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.7  A well pad in production in the NE United States13   

 

                                                            
13 Ricardo-AEA (2013) p.6. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.10 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.8  A shale gas production facility in the NE United States14   

Gas processing plants (for the compression of produced gas prior to transportation) which will serve a 
number of wells will in themselves have a different, potentially more intrusive, visual impact, as illustrated in 
Figure B8.9. These facilities serve significant hinterland and vary greatly in scale and visual impact15. 

 

                                                            
14 European Commission Joint Research Centre (2012) p.31. 
15 See: Marcellus Shale (undated) Our look at the 
Majorsville Gas Plant.  Available from from http://www.marcellus-shale.us/Majorsville_Gas-plant.htm [Accessed April 2015]; Stell, J. 
(undated) Marcellus and Utica shales attract more gas processing infrastructure, in Gas Processing News.  Available from 
http://www.gasprocessingnews.com/features/201410/marcellus-and-utica-shales-attract-more-gas-processing-infrastructure.aspx 
[Accessed April 2015];  
Smith, C.E. (2014) Wealth of gas processing, pipeline projects planned for Marcellus-Utica region, in UOGR.  Available from 
http://www.ogj.com/articles/uogr/print/volume-2/issue-1/marcellus/wealth-of-gas-processing-pipeline-projects-planned-for-marcellus-
utica-region.html [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.11 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Figure B8.9  Gas processing and cryogenic plant, Pennsylvania16   

 

Decommissioning of wells 
Decommissioning of wells and removal of site equipment would involve some construction activity. The 
activity would be short-term and take place on the existing site. Consequently no additional effects on 
landscape or visual impacts are anticipated. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 
Site restoration and reclamation would take place on the existing site with the aim to restore the original 
condition.  
It may not be possible to remove all well equipment from the site. However, remaining structures would be 
small scale and would not affect the general landscape or have visual impacts.  

Long-term effects on the landscapes have been anticipated to be neutral under the assumption that the 
original state of the site can be restored and that remaining structures would be negligible.  
Potential for the enhancement of landscapes has been identified where the original site character is of low 
value. 
A helpful summary17 of the likely landscape impacts set out above is reproduced in Table B8.2. Note that 
some of these aspects could be specific to the United States context for which they have been developed.  

 
 

                                                            
16 Ricardo-AEA (2013) p.25.  
17 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (2011) . 

   

April 2015 

  B8.12 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.2   Summary of New Landscape Features and Potential Visual Impacts 

Description of Activity 

On-site Well Pad Construction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Description of Typical New Landscape 
Features 

Description of Potential Visual Impacts 

  Newly created well pads - open, 

level areas averaging 
approximately 3.5 acres in size 

  Newly created linear features such 

as access roads and connecting 
pipelines 

  Newly created water impoundment 

areas (if necessary) 

  Construction equipment, including 
bulldozers, graders, backhoes, and 
other large equipment for clearing, 
cutting, filling and grading activities 

  Trucks for hauling equipment and 

materials 

  Worker vehicles 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

visual setting of areas in the 
vicinity of a well location, including 
views that contain a well location 

  Temporary or short-term duration - 
during the weeks or months while 
construction is  underway 

  Negative - because of the 

introduction of new features into 
the landscape 

  Site-specific - within views that 
contain individual well locations 

  Cumulative - within views of areas 

or regions that contain 
concentrations of well locations 

On-site Well Drilling 

  Drill rigs of varying heights and 

dimensions 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Auxiliary on-site equipment such 
as storage tanks for water, fuel, 
and drilling mud; generators; 
compressors; solids control 
equipment; a choke manifold; an 
accumulator; pipe racks; and the 
crew‘s office space 

  Trucks for hauling equipment and 

materials 

  Worker vehicles 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

visual settings of areas 
surrounding a well location, 
including views that include a well 
location 

  Temporary - during the weeks 

while drilling is underway 

  Periodic - during the times when 

drilling may occur over a three-
year period following the date that 
the initial drilling on a well site 
commences 

  Negative - throughout the duration 
of drilling, primarily because of the 
high visibility of drilling activities 
from surrounding vantage points 

  Site-specific - within views that 
contain individual well locations 

  Cumulative – within views of areas 

or regions that contain 
concentrations of well locations 

 
 
 

   

April 2015 

  B8.13 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.2 (continued)  Summary of New Landscape Features and Potential Visual Impacts 

Description of Typical New Landscape 
Features 

Description of Potential Visual Impacts 

  On-site equipment such as storage 
tanks for water, fuel, and fracturing 
additives; compressors; cranes; 
pipe racks; and the crew‘s office 
space 

  Trucks, including tractor trailers 
and other large trucks for hauling 
sand and fracturing additives, pipe-
hauling trucks, welding and other 
mechanical support trucks 

  Worker vehicles 

  Operating well pads - open, level 
areas averaging approximately 0.5 
to 1.0 acre in size, maintained in 
grassy or gravelled conditions 

  Wellhead locations and small 
aboveground facilities for the 
pumping and transfer of product 
into gas lines. 

  Access road maintained in 

gravelled condition  

  Connecting pipeline right-of-way 
maintained with grassy vegetation 

  Direct impacts – on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

visual settings of areas 
surrounding a well location, 
including views that include a well 
location 

  Temporary or short-term duration – 

during the weeks while hydraulic 
fracturing is underway 

  Periodic - during the times when 

fracturing may occur over the 
lifetime of the well(s) 

  Negative - throughout their 

duration, primarily because of the 
high visibility of fracturing activities 
from surrounding vantage points. 

  Site-specific - within views that 
contain  individual well locations 

  Cumulative – within views of areas 

or regions that contain 
concentration of well locations 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

settings within viewsheds that 
contain a well location 

  Long-term duration - during the 

years while active well sites remain 
viable 

  Negative - during short-term period 

of initial development 

  Neutral - during long-term period of 
production over a potential 30-year 
period 

  Site specific - within views that 
contain individual well locations 

  Cumulative – within views of areas 

or regions that contain 
concentrations of well locations 

Description of Activity 

On-site Well Fracturing 

Well Production 

 

   

April 2015 

Description of Activity 

On-site Well Site Reclamation 

Description of Typical New Landscape 
Features 

Description of Potential Visual Impacts 

  B8.14 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.2 (continued)  Summary of New Landscape Features and Potential Visual Impacts 

  Initial bare areas resulting from the 

removal of wellheads and small 
aboveground facilities used during 
production; re-contouring to pre-
existing terrain conditions; and re-
vegetation efforts 

  Subsequent vegetated areas 

reverting to pre-existing vegetation 
patterns and species 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

settings within viewsheds that 
would contain a well location 

  Temporary to short term - during 
removal of well equipment and 
structures, re-contouring terrain, 
and replanting of vegetation 

  Periodic and long-term - during 
periodic inspection or monitoring 
and implementation of any 
corrective actions to facilitate 
successful re-vegetation for 
several months to as long as one 
to three years 

  Neutral to beneficial - as 

vegetation succession proceeds 

  Site specific - within views that 
contain individual well locations 

  Cumulative – within views of areas 

or regions containing 
concentrations of well locations 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of a well location 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

settings within viewsheds that 
would contain a well location 

  Temporary to short term - during 
removal of well equipment and 
structures, re-contouring terrain, 
and replanting of vegetation 

  Periodic and long-term - during 
periodic inspection or monitoring 
and implementation of any 
corrective actions to facilitate 
successful re-vegetation for 
several months to as long as one 
to three years 

On-site Well Site Reclamation 

  Initial bare areas resulting from the 

removal of wellheads and small 
aboveground facilities used during 
production; re-contouring to pre-
existing terrain conditions; and re-
vegetation efforts 

  Subsequent vegetated areas 

reverting to pre-existing vegetation 
patterns and species 

 
 
 
 
 

   

April 2015 

  B8.15 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.2 (continued)  Summary of New Landscape Features and Potential Visual Impacts 

Description of Activity 

Description of Typical New Landscape 
Features 

Description of Potential Visual Impacts 

  Neutral to beneficial - as 

vegetation succession proceeds 

  Site specific - within views that 
contain individual well locations 

  Cumulative – within views of areas 

or regions containing 
concentrations of well locations 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of off-site housing 
locations and on local roads 

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

settings within viewsheds that 
would contain off-site housing and 
local roads 

  Temporary and periodic - during 

specific phases of well 
development (construction, drilling, 
fracturing, and reclamation) 

  Neutral to negative - occupancy of 
existing offsite housing locations 
would be consistent with capacity, 
but local traffic may result in 
congestion during and after work 
hours 

  Site-specific – at specific housing 

locations and along local roads 

  Direct impacts - on the existing 
visual setting of an off-site yard, 
storage area, or staging area  

  Indirect impacts - on the existing 

settings within viewsheds that 
contain an off-site yard, storage 
area, or staging area 

  Temporary and periodic - during 

specific phases of well 
development (construction, drilling, 
fracturing, and reclamation) 

 

 

Off-site periodic and temporary influx of 
specialized workforces at various phases 
of development 

  Increased use of local recreational 

vehicle or other camping areas 
(areas with cabins or designated 
for tent camping) for temporary or 
seasonal housing. 

  Increased local worker traffic 
during and after working hours 

Off-site contractor yards or equipment 
storage areas or other staging areas 

  Increased traffic and activity 

associated with construction and 
use of new contractor yards, 
equipment storage areas or other 
staging areas 

  Increased traffic and activity 

associated with use of existing 
contractor yards, equipment 
storage areas, or other staging 
areas 

 
 
 
 

   

April 2015 

  B8.16 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B8.2 (continued)  Summary of New Landscape Features and Potential Visual Impacts 

Description of Activity 

Description of Typical New Landscape 
Features 

Description of Potential Visual Impacts 

 

 

  Negative - due to the appearance 
and movement of high numbers of 
specialized and large equipment 
and vehicles 

  Site specific – at specific off-site 

yard, storage area, or staging area 
locations 

8.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle. 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
None identified. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Site selection to avoid visual intrusion onto sensitive receptors18, based on an assessment of 

landscape and visual impact to judge the relationship between the magnitude of the effects 
(nature-geographical extent-duration) and the sensitivity (low-medium-high) of the receptor(s)19; 
  Creation of bunds to help screen operations using stored topsoil as well as targeted planting of 

vegetation which would contribute to long-term screening20; 

  Best practice construction techniques such as minimising the vertical height of drilling 

equipment (typically 30-50m high) and site screening through existing features or use of 
planting and landscaping; 

  Optimise the phasing of the development of well pads to minimise cumulative impacts; and 
  Light pollution should be mitigated by restricting working hours to daylight hours and by site 

screening to avoid light pollution to the surrounding area. 

Production Development 

  Best practice construction techniques such as minimising the vertical height of drilling 

equipment and site screening through existing features or use of planting and landscaping21; 
and 

  Design measures to minimise effects resulting from pipelines. This could include measures 
such as routing along existing roads, minimising corridor width and maximising the speed of 
restoration and re-vegetation where feasible. 

                                                            
18 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) p. 429.  
19 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp.392/393. 
20 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp. 429/430.  
21 See Celtique (2012) Environmental Statement Chapter 14 for exploratory drilling at Wood Barn Farm, Adversane Lane, Broadford 
Bridge, Billingshurst, West Sussex.  Available from  http://buildings.westsussex.gov.uk/ePlanningOPS/tabPage3.jsp?aplId=1421 
[Accessed October 2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.17 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Production/operation/maintenance  

  Site screening (existing or through planting and landscaping) should be used to mitigate long-

term residual adverse effects. 

Decommissioning of wells 

  A study of the surrounding landscape character and sensitivity22 should be undertaken prior to 

decommissioning to identify measures which would allow efficient site restoration as well as 
opportunities for the enhancement of landscapes. 

Site restoration and relinquishment 

  Remaining structures should be incorporated into site design during restoration and 

reclamation. 

8.4  Regulatory Framework  

International 
The European Landscape Convention is principally directed at the national level, but emphasises the 
importance of landscape as a cultural as well as an aesthetic asset.  The convention also calls for improved 
public involvement in landscape matters.  The UK became a signatory to the European Landscape 
Convention in 2006.   

UK 
In the UK, there are numerous Acts governing the protection of the countryside, landscape and natural 
environment.  The National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 makes provision for National 
Parks, confers powers for the establishment and maintenance of nature reserves, makes provision for the 
recording, creation, maintenance and improvement of public paths and for securing access to open country 
and confers further powers for preserving and enhancing natural beauty.  National Parks are areas of 
relatively undeveloped and scenic landscape.  Designation as a national park may include substantial 
settlements and human land uses which are often integral parts of the landscape.  Land within a national 
park remains largely in private ownership.  Each National Park is operated by its own national park authority, 
with two ’statutory purposes’: 

  To conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the area; and  
  To promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of the parks. 

AONBs are areas of high scenic quality that have statutory protection in order to conserve and enhance the 
natural beauty of their landscapes.  AONB landscapes range from rugged coastline to water meadows to 
gentle lowland and upland moors.  Natural England has a statutory power to designate land as Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty. 

The Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 increased the duty of provision of public access to the 
countryside and strengthened legislation relating to Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs).  In particular, 
it requires public bodies to further the conservation and enhancement of SSSIs both in carrying out their 
operations, and in exercising their decision making functions. 
Section 50 of the Infrastructure Act 2015 inserts an amendment to the Petroleum Act 1998 regarding 
safeguards for onshore hydraulic fracturing.  These include a commitment that “hydraulic fracturing will not 
take place within other protected areas”, which will be defined in regulations issued by the Secretary of State 
for Energy and Climate Change.  It is noted however, that in the originally proposed amendment at the third 
reading of the Bill, protected areas included: 

                                                            
22 See: Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) pp. 392/393. 

   

April 2015 

  B8.18 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  Special areas of conservation under the Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c) Regulations 1994, 
  Special protection areas under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, 
  Sites of special scientific interest under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981,  

  National parks under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949, 
  The Broads under the Norfolk and Suffolk Broads Act 1988, and 
  Areas of outstanding natural beauty under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000. 

The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 seeks to ensure clean healthy, safe, productive and biologically 
diverse oceans and seas, by putting in place better systems for delivering sustainable development of 
marine and coastal environment.   
Other relevant Acts include: 

  The 1967 Forestry Act (as amended 1999) restricts and regulates the felling of trees.  The 1968 
Countryside Act enlarges the function of the Agency established under the National Parks and 
Access to the Countryside Act 1949, to confer new powers on local authorities and other bodies 
for the conservation and enhancement of natural beauty and for the benefit of those resorting to 
the countryside; 

  The 1986 Agriculture Act (with numerous revisions) covers the provision of agricultural services 

and goods, agricultural marketing compensation to tenants for milk quotas, conservation and 
farm grants; and 

  The Commons Act 2006, which protects common land and promotes sustainable farming, 

public access to the countryside and the interests of wildlife. 

England 
The Natural Environment and Rural Communities (NERC) Act 2006 implements key elements of the 
Government's Rural Strategy published in July 2004.  The NERC Act is designed to help achieve a rich and 
diverse natural environment and thriving rural communities through modernised and simplified arrangements 
for delivering Government policy.  The NERC Act established a new independent body - Natural England - 
responsible for conserving, enhancing, and managing England's natural environment for the benefit of 
current and future generations.  The Act made amendments to both the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 
and the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000, which further enhance provisions to biodiversity generally 
and SSSIs in particular. 
The National Planning Policy Framework (2012) includes strong protections for valued landscapes and 
townscapes as well as recognising the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside.  The importance of 
planning positively for high quality design is underlined and local and neighbourhood plans are expected to 
“develop robust and comprehensive policies that set out the quality of development that will be expected for 
the area”.  Planning policies and decisions are expected to respond to local character and history, and reflect 
the identity of local surroundings and materials, while not preventing or discouraging appropriate innovation.  
The Framework states (paragraph 64) that: “Permission should be refused for development of poor design 
that fails to take the opportunities available for improving the character and quality of an area and the way it 
functions”.   
The Framework has a number of specific requirements relating to planning and landscape including a clear 
expectation that the planning system should contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment by 
protecting and enhancing valued landscapes.  Local planning authorities are expected to set criteria based 
policies against which proposals for any development on or affecting protected landscape areas will be 
judged. In doing so, distinctions should be made between the hierarchy of international, national and locally 
designated sites and “great weight” should be given to “conserving landscape and scenic beauty in National 
Parks, the Broads and Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty”.  Local planning authorities in their plan-making 
are expected to take account of climate change and changes to landscape and contain a clear strategy for 
enhancing the natural, built and historic environment.  Where appropriate, “landscape character 

   

April 2015 

  B8.19 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

assessments should also be prepared, integrated with assessment of historic landscape character, and for 
areas where there are major expansion options assessments of landscape sensitivity”. 
With regard to mineral extraction, the Framework notes that when determining planning applications, local 
planning authorities should give great weight to the benefits of the mineral extraction, including to the 
economy.  However, the Framework also places a duty on local planning authorities to ensure that there are 
no unacceptable adverse impacts on the natural and historic environment and to take into account the 
cumulative effect of multiple impacts from individual sites and/or from a number of sites in a locality.  The 
Framework makes explicit reference to unconventional hydrocarbons; it states that mineral planning 
authorities should clearly distinguish between the three phases of development (exploration, appraisal and 
production) and address constraints on production and processing within areas that are licensed for oil and 
gas exploration or production. 
Planning Practice Guidance for Onshore Oil and Gas (2013) provides advice on the planning issues 
associated with the extraction of hydrocarbons.  It will be kept under review and should be read alongside 
other planning guidance and the NPPF.  The guidance identifies a range of issues that mineral planning 
authorities may need to address.  Those particularly relevant to landscape include: visual intrusion into the 
local setting and the wider landscape caused by the placement of any building or structure within the 
application site area; lighting; landscape character; and site restoration and aftercare. 
 

 

 
 

   

April 2015 

 

  B9.1 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

9 

 Health 

9.1 

Introduction 

Human health includes the potential for negative effects on public health and site workers as a result of shale 
gas activities.  This includes the impact of emissions to air and releases to water, noise and flood risk among 
others. 
There are links between the human health topic and other topics in the study, specifically air and water.    

9.2 

Assessment of Effects 

This section comprises of the review of the likely effects on health arising from the potential activities that 
could take place in the six main stages of unconventional oil and gas exploration and production.  Table 
B9.1 presents a summary of the key stages of exploration, production and decommissioning. 

Table B9.1   Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

Non-intrusive exploration, including: 

  Site identification, selection, characterisation; 

  Seismic surveys; 
  Securing of necessary development and operation permits. 

Exploration drilling  and hydraulic fracturing, including:  

  Pad preparation road connections and baseline monitoring; 
  Well design and construction and completion; 

  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing including flaring. 

Production development,  including : 

  Pad preparation and baseline monitoring; 
  Facility construction and installation; 

  Well design construction and completion; 
  Hydraulic fracturing; 
  Well testing, possibly including flaring 

  Provision of pipeline connections  
  (Possibly) re-fracturing. 

1 

2 

3 

 
 
 
 
 

   

April 2015 

  B9.2 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Table B9.1 (continued)  Unconventional Oil and Gas Exploration and Production Lifecycle and Key Activities   

Stage 

 

Activities 

4 

5 

6 

Production/operation/maintenance, including: 

  Gas/oil production; 
  Production and disposal of wastes/emissions; 

  Power generation, chemical use and reservoir monitoring; 
  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Decommissioning of wells, including: 

  Well plugging and testing; 
  Site equipment removal; 

  Environmental monitoring and well integrity monitoring. 

Site restoration and relinquishment, including: 

  Pre-relinquishment survey and inspection;  
  Site restoration and reclamation.  

 
Note: Exploration wells most usually move from Stage 2 to Stage 4, though some may be used for long-term production testing and 
some may be retained and their sites redeveloped as a production project.  For the purposes of this review, the appraisal stage (a term 
commonly used in industry) spans Stages 2 and 3 
 

Non-intrusive Exploration 
Site identification, selection and characterisation and the securing of regulator approval would be expected 
to be largely desk based.  As a result, no effects on health are expected from these activities. 

Seismic surveys (most commonly vibroseis and shot hole techniques) may generate noise.  However, noise 
levels are expected to be low and emissions temporary such that no health impacts would be expected.  
There may also be an increase in vehicular movements to conduct the seismic surveys, although any 
increase would be very small and therefore unlikely to affect human health. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

Pad preparation 
Activities associated with pad preparation, such as excavation, earth moving, the use of machinery and 
vehicle transport could potentially affect sensitive residential areas within close proximity to well pad sites 
due to the generation of noise, vibration and dust.  Depending on the level of noise and proximity to 
receptors, noise in particular has the potential to cause annoyance, affect sleep and performance, with 
children particularly vulnerable to the effects.1  However, impacts are likely to be similar to those associated 
with general construction activity and would occur over a relatively short time period.  For example, estimates 
by Cuadrilla in respect of a proposed temporary shale gas exploration site in Lancashire, England indicate 
that site preparation and construction of the well pad and access track would take up to two months.2     

                                                            
1 Stansfeld, S.A. and Matheson, M.P. (2003) Noise pollution: non-auditory effects on health, British Medical Bulletin, 68, 243–257.  
Available from http://bmb.oxfordjournals.org/content/68/1/243.full [Accessed April 2015]. 
2 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Temporary Shale Gas Exploration Preston New Road, Lancashire: Environmental Statement.  Available 
from  http://www.cuadrillaresources.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/PNR_ES_Vol1_Environmental_Statement.pdf [Accessed October 
2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.3 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Construction and preparation of the pad may be used as a focus for anti-fracking sentiment and may be 
subject to protest action from opposition groups and local communities.  This could potentially increase the 
fear of crime through the fear of vandalism and personal injury as a result of an influx of a large number of 
people into a local area.  In the UK, there have also been reports that recent protests against hydraulic 
fracturing have involved small levels of violence.3   

Drilling 
Drilling is an activity with significantly high noise levels, with continuous operations each day over a period of 
several weeks or months.  For construction equipment used in the preparatory stages, the maximum 
calculated composite noise level at 75m is 70dBA.  For horizontal drilling, the maximum noise level is 
64dBA.4  Depending on the distance from the noise source, any attenuation and ambient noise levels, noise 
at 64dBA could disturb local residents, particularly in sensitive areas and noise controls would be necessary.  
As the oil and gas sector already has widely used noise controls, it is anticipated that effects can largely be 
avoided if the installation is properly designed and managed. 
In this respect, the drilling of exploratory wells at the proposed Cuadrilla site in Lancashire is expected to 
take place across approximately five months for the vertical and horizontal sections of the first well (for a 
depth of 3,500m and lateral distance of 2,000m), with subsequent well drilling expected to take three months 
each.  Drilling works would include construction activities such as casing and cementing as well as the 
drilling itself.  Diesel generators are likely to be used to power the drilling rigs.  Cuadrilla indicate that three 
generators would be used 24 hours per day during drilling operations at its Lancashire site generating a 
noise level of 39 dBLAeq at receptors situated at a distance of 380m from the well pad boundary.  Whilst 
Cuadrilla view these levels as unlikely to be significant5, Lancashire County Council have deferred making a 
decision on the planning application due to concerns over localised noise impacts6  

The extended duration of drilling relative to conventional oil and gas exploration would involve increased 
emissions of pollutants such as particulate matter (PM10), nitrogen oxides (NOX), carbon monoxide (CO), 
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and sulphur dioxide (SO2) from diesel fumes generated from well drilling 
equipment.   These substances can all cause adverse health effects, particularly for the respiratory system.  
PM10 comprises of small airborne particles which are less than 10 micrometres in diameter.  These particles 
can enter the respiratory tract and have the potential to cause damage to lung tissue, affect breathing and 
the respiratory system and cause cancer.  NOx includes reactive gases such as nitrogen dioxide (NO2), 
which can irritate the lungs.  NOX also contributes to smog and ground level ozone (O3) formation which can 
cause further potential health impacts such as reducing lung function and causing respiratory inflammation.  
SO2 also affects breathing and respiratory systems, and can aggravate existing cardiovascular disease.7  
VOCs can cause slightly wider health effects, such as irritation of eyes, nose and throat; headaches and 
nausea; and damage to kidneys, liver and the central nervous system.8  Carbon monoxide is a toxic gas 
which displaces oxygen in the blood, which can cause nausea, headaches and dizziness, and is ultimately 
fatal at high concentrations.  The potential for the emissions to have a negative impact on local populations 
will depend on a site’s proximity to residential areas, and the sensitivity of receptors, such as those with pre-
existing respiratory conditions.   
Drilling of unconventional wells is expected to result in drill cuttings with an average volume of 270m3 per 
well, for a well of 2,100m depth and an additional lateral section of 1,200m.9  Geological formations contain 
naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM) such as radium, strontium and potassium.  There is 
therefore the potential for these cuttings to have elevated levels of radioactivity which could lead to health 
                                                            
3 The Telegraph (2014, 04 May) Anti-fracking protest ‘turns violent’.  Available from 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/crime/10806262/Anti-fracking-protest--turns-violent.html  [Accessed November 2014]. 
4 AEA (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons operations 
involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe: AEAT, report for the European Commission, 2012.  Available from 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/energy/pdf/fracking%20study.pdf [Accessed May 2013]. 
5 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014) Appendix F – Air Quality. 
6 BBC News (2015) Cuadrilla fracking applications: Lancashire County Council defer decision.  Available from 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lancashire-31007062 [Accessed April 2015]. 
7 United States Environmental Protection Agency (2014) Health Effects of Air Pollution.  Available from 
http://www.epa.gov/region07/air/quality/health.htm [Accessed November 2014].  
8 United States Environmental Protection Agency (2012) Volatile Organic Compounds.  Available from http://www.epa.gov/iaq/voc.html 
[Accessed November 2014]. 
9 AEA (2012). 

   

April 2015 

  B9.4 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

concerns if workers were exposed.  NORM levels are dependent on local geology, and may or may not be 
present at levels high enough to require protection for workers.  However, Public Health England’s (2014) 
review of the available evidence on potential public health impacts of shale gas extraction states that levels 
are usually similar to those in the ground beneath, and are not of specific concern.10.  Established 
procedures are in place to address radiological risks should they be required, and as such a minimal impact 
on health is expected. 

Hydraulic fracturing 
Hydraulic fracturing is expected to generate the loudest levels of noise of all the activities during the 
exploratory  stage (90dBA at 75m distance) based on the need to use generators to inject high volumes of 
water to achieve the required pressure.  This operation would take several days per frack.  Effective noise 
abatement measures are expected to reduce the impact, but there is potential for this noise to disturb local 
residents if activities are undertaken within close proximity to residential areas.9  Noise could be particularly 
disturbing for local residential receptors during evenings, night time and weekends, during which time the 
effects from noise could be significant.11  High noise levels would also affect site workers, and without 
appropriate protective measures and equipment could result in hearing loss and tinnitus.12  
Emissions of diesel fumes from fracturing fluid pumps could potentially have a negative impact on local air 
quality13, in a similar way as the drilling process.  Emissions are likely to include PM, NOX, CO, VOCs and 
SO2.  Furthermore, the on-site handling of proppant sand during the fracturing fluid make up operation could 
lead to generation of significant levels of dust as 0.25% of total sand may be emitted to the air,14 roughly 
equivalent to 25-100m3 of sand emitted per well.15  The long term inhalation of elevated concentrations of 
dust can result in health effects such as lung cancer, asthma and Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disorder 
(breathing problems resulting from lung damage), and for sand in particular, this can also lead to the lung 
disease silicosis.16  Working outside is not necessarily adequate protection for workers handling and working 
with dusty materials, and protective measures and equipment may be required. 

There is a risk of hydraulic fracturing causing water supply contamination (and generating emissions to air), 
principally due to spills but also due to the leakage of fracturing fluid and methane as a result of 
inadequacies in well cementing or the movement of contaminants through existing faults or porous rocks to 
groundwater resources (although the latter has not been observed in practice and would be very unlikely).  In 
addition, other substances such as trace elements, NORM and organic material may be contained in 
flowback water which, if not managed and treated, could cause contamination.  There have been concerns in 
the US regarding contamination of drinking water supplies, but issues have typically arisen from private 
borehole supplies in remote areas, which may have limited water treatment and quality testing.  In the UK, 
99% of drinking water is mains water supplied by water companies, which is rigorously monitored and 
treated to ensure adequate water quality.  These mains supplies are considered to be at low risk of 
impacting public health due to the regulatory requirements for the provision of safe drinking water supplies.  
However, private supplies in the UK may be at greater risk of pollution from shale gas activities.10 
A study of the flux of radioactivity in flowback fluid from shale gas development in the Carboniferous, 
Bowland Shale, UK; the Silurian Shale, Poland; and the Carboniferous Barnett Shale, US by Almond et al 

                                                            
10 Public Health England (2014) Review of the Potential Public Health Impacts of Exposures to Chemical and Radioactive Pollutants as 
a Result of Shale Gas Extraction.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/332837/PHE-CRCE-009_3-7-14.pdf [Accessed April 
2015].   
11 Cuadrilla Bowland Ltd (2014). 
12 Health and Safety Executive (2014) Noise at Work: Key Messages.  Available from http://www.hse.gov.uk/NOISE/keyfacts.htm 
[Accessed November 2014]. 
13 Lechtenböhmer et al. (2011) Impacts of shale gas and shale oil extraction on the environment and on human health.  Available from 
http://europeecologie.eu/IMG/pdf/shale-gas-pe-464-425-final.pdf [Accessed April 2015].    
14 Kellam (2012) Support to the identification of potential risks for the environment and human health arising from hydrocarbons 
operations involving hydraulic fracturing in Europe .  Cited in AEA (2012). 
15 Based on 5,000-20,000m3 of water used per well within fracturing fluid and the fluid being composed of 98-99% of water, and 1-1.9% 
proppant.  See King (2012) Hydraulic Fracturing 101. Journal of Petroleum Technology, April 2012 p34-42.  Available from 
http://fracfocus.org/sites/default/files/publications/hydraulic_fracturing_101.pdf [Accessed April 2015].  
16 Health and Safety Executive (2014) Dust.  Available from http://www.hse.gov.uk/construction/faq-dust.htm [Accessed November 
2014]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.5 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

(2014)17 found that levels of NORM in flowback water are much higher than found in groundwater, but well 
below permitted UK exposure limits such that they are unlikely to pose a threat to human health18. 
The hydraulic fracturing process is also highly water intensive.  Water consumption requirements will vary 
according to local geology, however a four well exploration site in Lancashire, UK, estimated that 
approximately 90,000m3 of water would be required.  The level of water consumption required has the 
potential to reduce water availability, with the potential for detrimental impacts on public water supplies and 
health.9  This could be significant in water stressed areas.   
Appendix B.3 Water and Appendix B.5 Waste provide further detail on the risks of water contamination 
and water consumption and the presence of NORMs in flowback water. 

Public perception of the impacts of hydraulic fracturing can affect mental, physical and emotional wellbeing.  
This can exacerbate or trigger health effects caused by anxiety or changes in behaviour arising from 
people’s belief about the project.  This can be alleviated through good use of information campaigns, 
provision of evidence on known risks, and monitoring of issues that may present a real or perceived health 
risk.11 

Well completion 
As the fracturing fluid returns to the surface, it contains natural gas and small amounts of VOCs.  The extent 
of emissions to air would depend on the nature and composition of shale gas at a particular drilling location 
and the well completion method.  The release of methane in enclosed areas can present a hazards and 
health risk due to its potentially explosive nature depending on concentrations and the presence of any 
ignition source, however this would not be anticipated at an open well site.10 

Geological disturbance caused by hydraulic fracturing may create pathways for the release of other gases 
apart from shale gas.  Radon has been highlighted as a particular concern because high levels of radon in 
poorly ventilated areas can increase the risk of lung cancer.19  Radon is a radioactive gas released from 
rocks such as shale, granite and limestone.  The level of radioactivity when radon escapes to open areas is 
generally low, but can build up to several thousand Becquerel per cubic meter in enclosed areas (compared 
to average indoor radon concentrations of 20 Bq.m-3 in the UK for example).10  If new pathways were created 
as a result of hydraulic fracturing that led to the accumulation of radon in buildings and homes, this could 
have a negative impact on human health.  Given that radon is colourless and odourless these levels could 
build up undetected.  However, the likelihood of new pathways being created is exceptionally low and the 
scale of such releases, if they occur, likely to be small.  Sound well integrity should prevent the transmission 
of radon from rocks into the well bore.  As radon is soluble, it is also present in flowback fluid and may be 
released to air at the surface.  There have not been measurements for the radon content or the release of 
radon from flowback fluid, however this could elevate radon levels in the immediate area around the 
wellhead.   

The presence of radioactive substances such as radium in flowback fluid may also result in the wastewater 
being classed as radioactive waste, requiring appropriate controls and disposal (see Appendix B.6 Waste).  
This may include radioactive tracers, if used to monitor the fracturing process.10  Radioactive scale and 
wastewater sludge may also be generated and require safe disposal as radioactive waste. 
The noise levels which would be generated through flaring during well completion are uncertain. However 
noise from flares can be minimised through appropriate flare design and it is not expected to have a negative 
impact on local communities.  Flaring would primarily result in the production of carbon dioxide (CO2) but 
also NOX, SO2, CO, and PM, as well as methane and VOCs in the event of incomplete combustion, which 
could affect local air quality and potentially the health of sensitive local receptors.20  Emissions to air during 

                                                            
17 Almond, S. Clancy, S.A. Davies, R.J. Worrall, F. (2014) The flux of radionuclides in flowback fluid from shale gas exploitation, in 
Environ Science and Pollution Research International 2014; 21(21): 12316–12324.  Available from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4200344/ [Accessed April 2015]. 
18 Durham Energy Institute (2014) How radioactive is fracking flowback water?  DEI Briefing Note No. 905: Autumn 2014.  Available 
from https://www.dur.ac.uk/resources/refine/NORMRB.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
19 National Cancer Institute (2011) Radon and Cancer.  Available from http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet/Risk/radon 
[Accessed September 2013]. 
20 MacKay, D.J.C. and Stone, T.J. (2013) Potential Greenhouse Gas Emissions Associated with Shale Gas Extraction and Use.  Report 
on behalf of DECC.  Available from 

   

April 2015 

  B9.6 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

flaring may be a greater issue during the exploratory stages, as there is less likely to be gas collection 
infrastructure in place compared to the later production stages.  Cuadrilla anticipates flaring to take place 
during an initial test period for 90 days in respect of its proposed exploratory site in Lancashire.  ‘Green 
completions’ (or reduced emissions completion (REC)) which capture the methane rather than flaring the gas 
are preferable, and would have health benefits from the reduced emissions to air.21  Green completions are 
discussed further in Appendix: B.5 Climate Change. 
Leakages (fugitive emissions) of methane and other pollutants such as NOX, CO and hydrocarbons may 
occur during well completion and well production from pumps, valves, pressure relief valves, flanges, 
agitators and compressors.9  Glycol dehydrators, used to remove water from the natural gas stream, are a 
further source of methane emissions and benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX).  During the 
exploration stages, there may also be smaller, less robust gas pipeline infrastructure in place connecting the 
well to the main gas pipeline, compared to later stages, which may therefore result in fugitive emissions 
during the transport of gas off site through the temporary pipelines.  Fugitive emissions may include 
methane, ethane, CO2, hydrogen sulphide, nitrogen and helium, in addition to volatile and semi-volatile 
organic compounds and naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM).9   However, it is anticipated that 
fugitive emissions are less likely from more robust pipeline infrastructure put in place during later production 
stages.  Emissions of VOCs releases can also occur from storage tanks and oil tanks.    

HGV movements 
HGV movements would be required to transport materials to and from a well pad site during each of the 
activities under this stage.  The number of movements could be more substantial if the water required for 
hydraulic fracturing and flowback is tankered to/from site.  In respect of its proposed site in Lancashire, 
Cuadrilla estimate that vehicle movements would peak at 250 truck movements per day during the most 
intense periods, although this would only be sustained at this level for a few days at a time. 

HGV movement may generate emissions and dust potentially affecting those with respiratory problems as 
well as noise and vibrations which may cause stress and anxiety to residents principally alongside local 
transport networks.  The principal emissions from diesel and petrol engines are CO, NOX, un-burnt 
hydrocarbons and PM.  However, the potential for negative health impacts would depend on numerous 
factors such as the proximity of HGV routes to residential or other sensitive areas and the existing 
background levels of pollution.   

Worker health and safety 
As with any construction activities, there are health and safety risks for workers on site.  The UK has a robust 
regulatory regime for health and safety at work, requiring risk assessment, appropriate control measures, 
monitoring and enforcement.  The UK health and safety regulatory regime takes a goal based approach, in 
which regulators set goals to be achieved and operators are responsible for how to achieve them.  The 
regime includes the approach to reduce risks to a level ‘as low as reasonably practicable’.  The approach in 
other counties, such as the US, is more prescriptive and sets specific standards that must be met.22  
Provided relevant UK health and safety legislations are followed (including the Construction (Design and 
Management) CDM Regulations 2007) and Borehole Sites & Operations Regulations (1995) then it is 
assumed that such risks would be eliminated, avoided or reduced to an acceptable minimum, in line with 
other construction and oil and gas activities.   

Production Development 
Most of the activities associated with stage 3 (i.e. - pad preparation, well construction and hydraulic 
fracturing) are expected to be largely similar to stage 2.  However, the scale, magnitude and duration of 
impact at this stage is expected to be greater given the need to drill, complete and hydraulic fracture a 
                                                                                                                                                                                                     
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/237330/MacKay_Stone_shale_study_report_09092013.p
df [Accessed April 2015]. 
21 DECC (2014) Fracking and Local Air Quality.  Available from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277219/Air.pdf [Accessed April 2015]. 
22 Royal Academy of Engineering and Royal Society (2012) Shale Gas in the UK, A Review of Hydraulic Fracturing.  Available from 
https://royalsociety.org/policy/projects/shale-gas-extraction/report/ [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.7 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

greater number of wells.  In addition, there would be the need for provision of pipeline connections which 
would further increase the scale of activity required.  

Production/operation/maintenance 
There is expected to be a minimal level of ongoing noise from the wellhead installations during production 
and at a level unlikely to have any negative impact on local populations. 

Wells may be refractured during their lifetime to stimulate the flow of gas.  In the US, the frequency of re-
fracturing is not certain and is estimated to be once per 5 – 10 years on average, if at all.  For the purposes 
of their report, AEA (2012) assumed that a well would be re-fractured between 0 and 4 times over a well 
lifetime of up to 40 years.  Due to refracturing, associated health risks are likely to be similar to those 
identified during stages 2 and 3 although AEA (2012) note that, whilst wells would be monitored during re-
fracturing, there is uncertainty with respect to the risks associated with re-fracturing on well integrity.   
Notwithstanding, during production it is expected that the integrity wells would be tested and any potential 
failure of the well would be monitored, and remedial measures would be implemented to address any issues 
identified using established industry processes.  This, alongside with the assumption that wells will be 
located an adequate distance from drinking water, should result in a minimal risk. 
Transportation of materials and equipment during the production and maintenance phase is expected to be 
minimal in the most part.  By this stage, it is anticipated that water pipelines would be connected to the site to 
provide water and remove waste water from the fracturing process.  This would substantially reduce vehicle 
movements and associated exhaust emissions compared to exploration and test stages where water may be 
tankered on and off site.  Additionally, if a power connection is in place on the site during long-term 
production, emissions from diesel generators to pump fracturing fluid into the well may no longer arise.   
Well pad sites may be subject to residual protest action from opposition groups and local communities.  This 
could potentially increase the fear of crime through the fear of vandalism and personal injury as a result of an 
influx of a large number of people into a local area, although this is expected to be a much lower risk than 
compared to previous stages.  There may also be continued mental health impacts caused by elevated 
health concerns.  In this respect, a study of health concerns in communities living on the Marcellus Shale, 
US by Ferrar et al (2013) found that stress was a frequently reported health impact23.  Similarly, a wide-
ranging health impact assessment (HIA) undertaken by the Colorado School of Public Health24 to address 
community concerns about health impacts of natural gas development and production in Battlement Mesa, 
US identified psychological impacts (such as depression, anxiety and stress) amongst residents. 

Radon can be present in natural gas, typically at levels of approximately 200 Bq.m-3, although US studies 
have shown average radon levels of 1,370 Bq.m-3, ranging up to 95,300 Bq.m-3.  Even at these high levels, 
delivery of natural gas to customers is still only expected to produce indoor radon concentrations of 20 Bq.m-
3 (comparable to UK averages).  Radon levels in delivered gas would depend on transit times and 
processing, as a short delivery time would give less opportunity for the radioactive gas to decay (half-life of 
3.8 days) and increase the risk of radon exposure.10 

Decommissioning of wells 
Health and safety risks associated with the decommissioning process will be similar to those encountered on 
a conventional demolition site (e.g. risks related to the use of heavy machinery, excavation and lifting) and it 
is assumed that all standard precautions would be taken to safeguard workers and the public.   

HGV movements required to remove site equipment from site may generate emissions and dust potentially 
affecting those with respiratory problems as well as noise and vibrations which may cause stress/anxiety to 
residents principally alongside local transport networks.  . 

                                                            
23 Ferrar KJ, Kriesky J, et al (2013) Assessment and longitudinal analysis of health impacts and stressors perceived to result from 
unconventional shale gas development in the Marcellus Shale region. International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health 
19(2): 104–12. 
24 Colorado School of Public Health (2011) Battlement Mesa Health Impact Assessment (2nd Draft).  Available from http://www.garfield-
county.com/environmental-health/battlement-mesa-health-impact-assessment-draft2.aspx [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.8 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

As with any demolition site, there is a risk of accidental discharges of demolition-related materials to water, 
air or land and potential for the creation of new pollution pathways for existing contaminants on the site.  
However, it is considered that the probability of such effects occurring is low and pollution control 
management procedures would be adopted to help mitigate this risk. 
Following production, wells must be properly closed with cement plugs and/or mechanical barriers in the 
wellbore to eliminate the pathway to the surface or freshwater sources.  The inadequate sealing of wells 
could therefore result in subsurface pathways for contaminant migration leading to groundwater pollution and 
potentially surface water pollution.  This risk is discussed further in Appendix B3: Water and Flood Risk.   

Site restoration and relinquishment 
Activities during site restoration and reclamation include landscaping, planting and re-vegetation.  This, 
alongside with associated vehicle movements for transportation of materials such as topsoil, may generate 
noise, vibration, dust or emissions to air.  The potential for health impacts will depend on the level of 
restoration and reclamation required as well as the distance of residential areas from site.  However, this is 
considered to be minimal. 

9.3  Mitigation Measures 

The following section sets out the potential mitigation measures available at each stage of the project life 
cycle.9, 10, 11, 22, 25  Mitigation measures presented in Appendix B.3: Water and Flood Risk and Appendix 
B.4: Air are also relevant  

Non-intrusive Exploration 

  Sites selected should avoid residential and other sensitive areas. 

Exploration drilling and hydraulic fracturing 

  Operators should be required to carry out a comprehensive high-level assessment of 

environmental risks, including risks to human health, and to consult with stakeholders including 
local communities, as early as practicable in the development of their proposals.26 

  Operators should seek to limit noise, dust and mobilisation of any contaminants during 

construction as part of a Construction Environmental Management Plan (CEMP). 

  Measures should be implemented to reduce dust generation such as the use of different 

proppants if feasible. 

  Speed limits (circa 15 – 20 mph) should be adopted on sites to reduce dust. 
  Noise modelling should be undertaken in advance of works to enable appropriate mitigation 

measures to be put in place.   

  Noise controls should be implemented during the drilling process to avoid adverse health 

effects.  Controls may include:  

 

  good design and management of equipment;  
  positioning of equipment on site to screen it from receptors; selection of plant and 

construction methods to reduce noise and vibration;  

  fit and maintain exhaust silencers for site vehicles;  

                                                            
25 Celtique Energie Weald Ltd (2013) Northup Field, Wisborough Green, Planning Application, Environmental Statement. 
26 As detailed in written ministerial statement by Edward Davey (2012) Exploration of Shale Gas.  Available from 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20121217150421/http:/www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/news/wms_shale/wms_shale.aspx 
[Accessed September 2013]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.9 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  limit drill pipe cleaning (‘hammering’) to certain daytime hours, and use rubber hammer 

covers on the sledges when clearing pipes; 

  use compressors and generators with lined and sealed acoustic covers; 
  use higher or larger-diameter stacks for any flaring operations at the exploratory stage 

(‘green completions’ which capture the methane for use should be implemented in 
preference to flaring when appropriate infrastructure is in place); 

  reduce noise from air rotary drilling discharge pipes through actions such as orientation away 

from noise receptors and use of a large-diameter discharge line; 

  switch off vehicles and machinery when not in use;  
  use electric pumps; 

  use sound barriers to supplement noise attenuation from natural features; and 
  limit noise generating activities to weekdays e.g. between 7am to 7pm to avoid causing 

disturbance at weekends and at night. 

  Sites layouts should be planned to avoid the need for vehicle reversing manoeuvres and 

associated reversing alarms. 

  Appropriate limits on maximum noise levels should be set and noise monitoring undertaken to 

demonstrate compliance with limits. 

  Hearing and breathing protection for site operatives should be provided where needed. 
  Controls, such as safety equipment and radiological protection, should be implemented for site 

operatives and visitors on site. 

  Adequate separation between drinking water sources and drilling areas should be adopted 

(these will differ depending on geological characteristics at site and in the surrounding area).  
No drilling should take place within areas with vulnerable groundwater that are used for potable 
water supplies. 

  Wells should be adequately cased and sealed to avoid migration of methane or contaminants 

out of the well bore and into other geological formations. 

  Spill prevention and pollution control measures should be implemented on site to avoid 

accidental discharges/manage their impact. 

  HGV routing should seek to avoid residential areas and existing areas of poor air quality. 
  If activities are within a radon affected area, monitoring of radon levels should be undertaken 

and appropriate precautions implemented if levels are found to be elevated.  

  Safety management plans should be implemented which include mitigation measures and 
monitoring programmes.  A mechanism should also be put in place to audit the site’s risk 
management processes.  

  The following hierarchal approach to addressing hazards should be followed where possible: 

eliminate hazards through design; where hazards cannot be designed out they should be 
isolated or protection to workers and the public should be provided; where the hazard cannot be 
avoided by protection or isolation, its effects should be mitigated through design, process 
changes and management control measures. 

  Site specific emergency response procedures should be put in place in consultation with 

emergency services. 

  Close consultation and full exchange of information with the local community is essential, liaison 
with the local police and authorities, and the use of appropriate on-site security should minimise 
the risk of negative consequences of protest action, such as an increase in fear of crime. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.10 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  The provision of clear and accurate and consistent information, including evidence of known 

risks should be maintained. 

  Monitoring programmes should be implemented for environmental factors which may present 

health risks (or perceived health risks) to alleviate anxiety in local communities. 

Production Development 
As for exploration drilling. 

Production/operation/maintenance  
As above for exploration drilling, in addition to: 

  Undertake regular monitoring and testing of well integrity. 

Decommissioning of wells 
As for exploration drilling, in addition to: 

  Well design and methods of plugging should minimise the risk of contamination.  Monitoring 

should be undertaken to detect any release of contaminants to groundwater.   

9.4  Review of Regulatory Framework  

The regulatory framework for the control of water quality, emissions to air and treatment of wastewater are 
set out in Appendices B.3 Water and Flood Risk, B.4 Air, and B.6 Waste and Resource Use, 
respectively.  The regulatory review below includes items which are additional to the water, air and waste 
regulatory regimes. 

International/European 
The World Health Organization (WHO)27 states that “health promotion goes beyond health care.  It puts 
health on the agenda of policy makers in all sectors and at all levels”; consequently, healthy public policy has 
been a main goal of health development in many countries.  The Canadian Lalonde Report (1974) 
identified four health fields independently responsible for individual health: environment, human biology, 
lifestyle and health care organisation.  
The WHO Children’s Environment and Health Action Plan for Europe (CEHAPE) (2004) was launched 
in June 2004 and signed by all 53 Member States of the WHO European Region.  The aim of the CEHAPE is 
to protect the health of children and young people from environmental hazards.  

The European Union (EU) has a Programme for Community action in the field of Health (2008-2013) and, on 
23rd October 2007 the Commission adopted a new overarching Health Strategy 'Together for Health - A 
Strategic Approach for the EU 2008-2013'.  Community Action focuses on tackling health determinants 
which are categorized as: personal behaviour and lifestyles; influences within communities which can sustain 
or damage health; living and working conditions and access to health services; and general socio-economic, 
cultural and environmental conditions.  A review in 2011 determined that the principles and objectives of this 
strategy would remain valid across the next decade to support the Europe 2020 growth strategy.  Investing 
in Health – Commission Staff Working Document (2013) sets out how health investment contributes to 
the Europe 2020 objectives of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. 
The Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) Directive specifically requires the consideration of: “the 
likely significant effects on the environment, including on issues such as …, human health …” (European 
Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 2001).  The SEA Protocol (United Nations Economic 
Commission for Europe, 2003) implements the political commitments made at the Third European 
                                                            
27 See WHO (1986) Ottawa Charter adopted at the First International Conference on Health Promotion in 1986.  Available from 
http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/conferences/previous/ottawa/en/index3.html [Accessed April 2015]. 

   

April 2015 

  B9.11 
 
 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

Conference on Environment and Health and uses the term ’environment and health‘ throughout.  It indicates 
that health authorities should be consulted at the different stages of the process and so goes further than the 
SEA Directive.  Once ratified, it will require changes to the SEA Directive to require that health authorities are 
statutory consultees. 
The WHO publication Health Impact Assessment in Strategic Environmental Assessment (2001) 
provides a review of Health Impact Assessment concepts, methods and practice to support the development 
of a protocol on SEA to the Espoo Convention, which adequately covers health impacts. 
There is a Europe-wide directive relating to drilling safety, the Mineral-Extracting Industries - Drilling 
Directive (92/91/EEC), which sets out the minimum requirements for improving the health and safety of 
works in the mineral extractive industries.  Additionally, the Ionising Radiation Directive (96/29/Euratom) 
lays down safety standards for the protection of the health of workers and the general public against the 
dangers arising from ionizing radiation, including radon gas. 

UK 
Many of the UK policies and strategies regarding health are aimed at understanding trends and the nature of 
health issues, understanding the links between health issues and other related factors (such as economic 
status, etc.), and, primarily, at reducing the inequalities in health.  Whilst some applicable policies/strategies 
are contained within adopted strategies, many of the Government’s objectives and intended actions are 
contained within White Papers and guidance papers. 
The Children and Young People’s Health Outcomes Strategy was launched in 2012 through a new 
Forum which makes key recommendations regarding the need for system changes and opportunities to 
influence the health and care system.  

There is a range of regulation in place specifically to manage occupational health and safety.  This regulation 
is primarily based on the overarching Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974, which sets out general 
duties of employers to protect employees and other persons.  There are numerous supporting regulations, 
with a key piece of legislation being the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1999.  
This requires a risk assessment to be carried out to identify the nature and levels of risk associated with a 
work activity, and appropriate precautions to be implemented to eliminate or control these risks.  A 
proportionate response according to the risk is required, with the higher the level of risk identified through the 
assessment, the greater the measures that will be needed to reduce it. Additional regulations under the Act 
include the Borehole Site and Operations Regulations 1995, which are concerned with the health and 
safety management of oil and gas sites, and the Offshore Installations and Wells (Design and 
Construction, etc) Regulations 1996, which relate to the integrity of all wells drilled for petroleum extraction 
(including shale gas).  The Construction (Design and Management) Regulations 2007 are also in place to 
improve health and safety at construction sites, with legal duties placed on a range of parties, including 
designers, clients, contractors and workers. 
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) is responsible for the inspection and regulation of workplaces to 
ensure the health and safety of workforces and others affected by work activities.  For shale gas operations, 
the HSE will assess well designs prior to construction, monitor well operations during construction, and 
undertake site inspections of well integrity during the operational phase.28  Any major incidents relating to 
well integrity would have to be reported by operators to the HSE under the Reporting of Injuries Diseases 
and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations 1995. 
The Environmental Protection Act 1990 defines what constitutes a statutory nuisance, which includes 'any 
noise emitted from premises [including land] so as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance' and 'noise that is 
prejudicial to health or a nuisance and is emitted from a vehicle, machinery or equipment in a street'.  Under 
Part III of the Act, local authorities or private individuals may take action to secure abatement of any such 
nuisance.  There are also provisions for preventing a nuisance occurring or an intermittent nuisance 
recurring.  Only one person need be affected for action to be possible. 

 
                                                            
28 The Environment Agency and the Health and Safety Executive (2012) Working together to Regulate Unconventional Oil and Gas 
Developments.  Available from http://www.hse.gov.uk/aboutus/howwework/framework/aa/hse-ea-oil-gas-nov12.pdf [Accessed April 
2015]. 

   

April 2015 

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  C1 
 
                      
Appendix C  
EU “Acquis Communautaire” Relating to Shale Gas 

 

 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  C2 
 
                      

Abbreviation 

Directive/Regulation 

AUTOMOTIVE 

Regulation (EC) No 595/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 June 2009 on type-approval of motor 
vehicles and engines with respect to emissions from heavy duty vehicles (Euro VI) and on access to vehicle repair and 
maintenance information and amending Regulation (EC) No 715/2007 and Directive 2007/46/EC and repealing 
Directives 80/1269/EEC, 2005/55/EC and 2005/78/EC (OJ L 188, 18.7.2009, p. 1–13) 

AQD 

BRP 

EIAD 

ELD 

END 

GD 

GWD 

HLD 

IED 

IPPCD 

MWD 

Directive 2008/50/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2008 on ambient air quality and cleaner 
air for Europe (OJ L 152, 11.6.2008, p. 1–44) 

Regulation (EU) No 528/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 May 2012 concerning the making 
available on the market and use of biocidal products (OJ L 167, 27.6.2012, p. 1–123) 
Directive 98/8/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 February 1998 concerning the placing of biocidal 
products on the market (OJ L 123, 24.4.1998, p. 1–63) 

Directive 2011/92/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 2011 on the assessment of the 
effects of certain public and private projects on the environment (OJ L 26, 28.1.2012, p. 1–21) 

Directive 2004/35/CE of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on environmental liability with 
regard to the prevention and remedying of environmental damage (OJ L 143, 30.4.2004, p. 56–75) 

Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 June 2002 relating to the assessment and 
management of environmental noise - Declaration by the Commission in the Conciliation Committee on the Directive 
relating to the assessment and management of environmental noise (OJ L 189, 18.7.2002, p. 12–25) 

Council Directive 80/68/EEC of 17 December 1979 on the protection of groundwater against pollution caused by certain 
dangerous substances (OJ L 20, 26.1.1980, p. 43–48) 

Directive 2006/118/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on the protection of 
groundwater against pollution and deterioration (OJ L 372, 27.12.2006, p. 19–31) 

Directive 94/22/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 1994 on the conditions for granting and 
using authorizations for the prospection, exploration and production of hydrocarbons (OJ L 164, 30.6.1994, p. 3 -8) 

Directive 2010/75/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 on industrial emissions 
(integrated pollution prevention and control) (OJ L 334, 17.12.2010, p. 17–119) 

Directive 2008/1/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 January 2008 concerning integrated pollution 
prevention and control (OJ L 24, 29.1.2008, p. 8–29) 

Directive 2006/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 on the management of waste 
from extractive industries and amending Directive 2004/35/EC (OJ L 102, 11.4.2006, p. 15–34) 

NATURA2000 

Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 
206, 22.7.1992, p. 7–50) 
Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild 
birds (OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7–25) 

Council Directive 96/29/Euratom of 13 May 1996 laying down basic safety standards for the protection of the health of 
workers and the general public against the dangers arising from ionizing radiation (OJ L 159, 29.6.1996, p. 1–114) 

Directive 97/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 1997 on the approximation of the 
laws of the Member States relating to measures against the emission of gaseous and particulate pollutants from internal 
combustion engines to be installed in non-road mobile machinery (OJ L 59, 27.2.1998, p. 1–86) 

Directive 2000/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 8 May 2000 on the approximation of the laws of 
the Member States relating to the noise emission in the environment by equipment for use outdoors (OJ L 162, 3.7.2000, 
p. 1–78) 

Directive 2003/4/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2003 on public access to 
environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90/313/EEC (OJ L 41, 14.2.2003, p. 26-32) 

Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the 
Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH), establishing a European Chemicals 
Agency, amending Directive 1999/45/EC and repealing Council Regulation (EEC) No 793/93 and Commission 
Regulation (EC) No 1488/94 as well as Council Directive 76/769/EEC and Commission Directives 91/155/EEC, 
93/67/EEC, 93/105/EC and 2000/21/EC (OJ L 396, 30.12.2006, p. 1–849) 

Directive 2001/42/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 June 2001 on the assessment of the effects of 
certain plans and programmes on the environment (OJ L 197, 21.7.2001, p. 30-37) 

NORMS 

NRMMD 

OMND 

PAEID 

REACH 

SEAD 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

© Amec Foster Wheeler Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

  C3 
 
                      

Abbreviation 

Directive/Regulation 

SEVESO II 

Council Directive 96/82/EC of 9 December 1996 on the control of major-accident hazards involving dangerous 
substances (OJ L 10, 14.1.1997, p. 13–33) 

SEVESO III 

SHPWEI 

Directive 2012/18/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 July 2012 on the control of major-accident 
hazards involving dangerous substances, amending and subsequently repealing Council Directive 96/82/EC (OJ L 197, 
24.7.2012, p. 1–37) 

Council Directive 92/91/EEC of 3 November 1992 concerning the minimum requirements for improving the safety and 
health protection of workers in the mineral- extracting industries through drilling (eleventh individual Directive within the 
meaning of Article 16 (1) of Directive 89/391/EEC) (OJ L 348, 28.11.1992, p. 9-24) 

UWWD 

Council Directive 91/271/EEC of 21 May 1991 concerning urban waste-water treatment (OJ L 135, 30.5.1991, p. 40–52) 

Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 November 2008 on waste and repealing 
certain Directives (OJ L 312, 22.11.2008, p. 3–30) 

Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for 
Community action in the field of water policy (OJ L 327, 22.12.2000, p. 1–73) 

Regulation (EC) N° 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on shipments of waste 
(OJ L 190, 12.7.2006, p. 1-98) 

WD  

WFD 

WSR 

 
 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

4 

© AMEC Environment & Infrastructure UK Limited 

 
 
 

 

   

April 2015 
Doc Ref. 35779rr   

